Title: Lorentz Framework for Semantic Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16836v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:34:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Lorentz Framework for Semantic Segmentation 

## Zahid Hasan * Masud Ahmed Nirmalya Roy Department of Information Systems, University of Maryland, Baltimore County 

{zhasan3, mahmed10, nroy }@umbc.edu (a) (b) (c) (d) 

Figure 1. (a) Lorentz model achieves flatter minima (bottom) compared to Euclidean model (top). (b) Semantic mask for a sample of ADE20K (c) Confidence map generated for traffic sign, cars, person, and sidewalk (c) Boundary Estimation by minimum exterior angle. 

## Abstract 

Semantic segmentation in hyperbolic space enables com-pact modeling of hierarchical structure while providing in-herent uncertainty quantification. Prior approaches predom-inantly rely on the Poincar ´e ball model, which suffers from numerical instability, optimization, and computational chal-lenges. We propose a novel, tractable, architecture-agnostic semantic segmentation framework (pixel-wise and mask clas-sification) in the hyperbolic Lorentz model. We employ text embeddings with semantic and visual cues to guide hierar-chical pixel-level representations in Lorentz space. This en-ables stable and efficient optimization without requiring a Riemannian optimizer, and easily integrates with existing Eu-clidean architectures. Beyond segmentation, our approach yields free uncertainty estimation, confidence map, boundary delineation, hierarchical and text-based retrieval, and zero-shot performance, reaching generalized flatter minima. We introduce a novel uncertainty and confidence indicator in Lorentz cone embeddings. Further, we provide analytical and empirical insights into Lorentz optimization via gradient anal-ysis. Extensive experiments on ADE20K, COCO-Stuff-164k, Pascal-VOC, and Cityscapes, utilizing state-of-the-art per-pixel classification models (DeepLabV3 and SegFormer) and mask classification models (mask2former and maskformer), validate the effectiveness and generality of our approach. Our results demonstrate the potential of hyperbolic Lorentz embeddings for robust and uncertainty-aware semantic seg-mentation. Code is available at https://github.com/ 

> *Corresponding author: zhasan3@umbc.edu

mxahan/Lorentz_semantic_segmentation .

## 1. Introduction 

Semantic segmentation, which assigns a semantic label to every pixel in an image, is a fundamental task in computer vision. State-of-the-art architectures formulate this problem either as per-pixel classification [9], or as mask classification, where a set of binary masks is predicted and each mask is associated with a single class label [10, 11]. Despite these structural differences, both paradigms typically treat seman-tic segmentation as a flat classification task, relying on one-hot encoded labels and modeling categories as mutually exclusive and independent [60]. This formulation overlooks the rich se-mantic relationships and hierarchical structures inherent in ob-ject categories—for instance, “vehicle” as a parent concept of “car,” “bus,” and “truck.” By disregarding such dependencies, existing approaches fail to incorporate meaningful inductive biases, thereby limiting their generalization capability. Recent advances have attempted to overcome this limita-tion by integrating visual and textual information through Vision–Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP [47]. Several studies extend this paradigm to semantic segmen-tation via text-guided supervision, including mask-level vision–language alignment [14], pixel–text score maps [48], and text-supervised segmentation frameworks [58, 64], resulting in improved zero-shot and open-vocabulary performance. Nevertheless, these approaches, along with most contemporary methods, embed both image and text representations in Euclidean space. Such geometry is inherently limited in modeling hierarchical structures [15], 1

> arXiv:2604.16836v1 [cs.CV] 18 Apr 2026

as it treats all points uniformly and fails to efficiently capture the exponential growth of concept subtypes characteristic of semantic taxonomies [22, 43]. Hyperbolic spaces provide a geometrically principled al-ternative, as their negative curvature and exponential volume growth constitute a continuous analogue of tree-like struc-tures [22,44]. This property enables efficient representation of hierarchical relationships: general parent concepts (e.g., “ani-mal”) can be positioned near the origin, while increasingly spe-cific child concepts (e.g., “dog,” “cat”) are embedded farther away, naturally encoding is-a relations and yielding inter-pretable, semantically consistent embeddings [15, 28, 43, 44]. Despite their promise, existing hyperbolic approaches in computer vision [15, 28, 30] predominantly focus on global, image-level representations. Extending hyperbolic modeling to dense prediction tasks remains non-trivial: per-pixel classification requires computationally intensive manifold operations at scale, and mask-classification architectures introduce additional structural complexities that further complicate integration within hyperbolic spaces. Pioneering studies [2, 7, 56] have investigated hyperbolic semantic segmentation using the Poincar ´e ball model, primar-ily within per-pixel classification frameworks. However, these approaches are prone to numerical instability and gradient approximation errors [44]. The Lorentz (hyperboloid) model in Minkowski space provides a mathematically equivalent yet more numerically stable and computationally efficient alternative, particularly in low-dimensional settings, offering closed-form expressions for key operations such as distance computation and exponential maps [44]. Despite these advantages and its suitability for large-scale, text-guided segmentation, the Lorentz model remains largely underex-plored in dense prediction tasks. Existing Lorentz-based methods predominantly focus on embedding entire images or global features, leaving unresolved the challenge of learning efficient, pixel-wise hyperbolic representations guided by semantic structure. Moreover, current hyperbolic segmenta-tion approaches are limited to per-pixel classification models, due to the relative simplicity of replacing the final Euclidean classification layer with hyperbolic operations. In contrast, mask-classification architectures, despite consistently outper-forming per-pixel counterparts, have been largely overlooked in hyperbolic settings. This reveals a clear research gap: the ab-sence of a unified, efficient, and stable hyperbolic framework that systematically supports both pixel-classification and mask-classification paradigms for semantic segmentation. To address this gap, [25] develops a hyperbolic Lorentz framework for per-pixel segmentation architectures. Building upon this foundation, the present work proposes a generalized text-guided hyperbolic semantic segmentation framework in the Lorentz model that supports both per-pixel and mask-classification architectures. We leverage rich textual descriptions to encode semantic and visual priors as class prototypes embedded in hyperbolic space, grounded in the insight that image pixels represent specific instances of abstract concepts described by language, forming an inherent semantic hierarchy. We capture this structure by leveraging the order embeddings [53] within the Lorentz manifold and extend the entailment loss formulation [15, 22] to the dense prediction setting. This constrains each pixel-level feature to lie within the convex entailment cone induced by its corresponding textual embedding, enforcing a geometrically consistent visual–semantic hierarchy and enabling structured representation learning for segmentation. Our main contributions are as follows. (i) We propose a 

Novel Text-Guided Hierarchical Hyperbolic Semantic Seg-mentation Framework grounded in the numerically stable Lorentz model, enabling scalable pixel-wise training on large datasets while preserving interpretability via Poincar ´e projec-tion. We extend the entailment loss to pixel-level embeddings, constraining visual features within the entailment cone of their corresponding concept, to maintain semantic hierarchy and consistency in hyperbolic space. We further provide an analytic gradient analysis to characterize the learning dynam-ics within the Lorentz model and offer theoretical insight into its optimization behavior. (ii) Our architecture-agnostic approach introduces Minimal Overhead and Architecture Compatibility Across both per-pixel and mask-classification segmentation models in the Lorentz model. For per-pixel classification, we adopt a hyperbolic sample-to-prototype for-mulation for per-pixel architectures. For mask-classification architectures, we propose a hyperbolic sample-to-prototype formulation to align mask queries with class prototypes, and a sample-to-sample formulation for semantic mask generation. (iii) Empirical Validation and Geometric Analysis. We validate our approach on multiple benchmarks, including ADE20K, COCO-Stuff-164k, Cityscapes, and Pascal VOC, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance across both per-pixel and mask-classification models. Furthermore, the Lorentz-space geometry provides a novel pixel-level uncertainty estimation by quantifying deviations from euclidean prototype setting, enabling confidence assessment and boundary localization without additional training or post-processing. Extensive ablation studies confirm the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed framework. 

## 2. Related Works 

Semantic Segmentation Architectures : Semantic segmentation architectures generally fall into two paradigms: per-pixel classification and mask classification. Per-pixel approaches assign a class label to each pixel by applying a classification loss at every spatial location, thereby implicitly partitioning the image into semantic regions. Representative models in this paradigm include U-Net [50], DeepLabV3 [8], and SegFormer [60]. In contrast, mask-classification models predict a finite set of binary masks, each paired with a class probability. This formulation provides a unified framework for semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation, and has been adopted by architectures such as Mask R-CNN [26], DETR [6], MaskFormer [11], and Mask2Former [10]. 

Deep Learning in Hyperbolic Space has recently 2garnered significant attention for its capacity to model hierarchical structures and uncertainty, as well as to im-prove representational robustness [39, 45]. Foundational contributions include Poincar ´e embeddings for hierarchical representations [43] and Lorentz model optimization for improved numerical stability and scalability [44]. Com-prehensive surveys [39, 45] highlight the advantages of hyperbolic geometry for constructing low-dimensional, hierarchy-preserving embeddings, and document its recent advances in deep learning adaptation. Order embeddings [53] align visual–semantic hierarchies with partial orders in Eu-clidean space. This framework was subsequently extended to hyperbolic geometry through the introduction of geodesically convex entailment cones in the Poincar ´e model [22]. Later works [15, 34] further adapted this formulation to the Lorentz model, deriving closed-form entailment cone expressions. Complementary to these efforts, [51, 52] propose algorithms for embedding graph nodes in hyperbolic space with provably low distortion given an underlying tree structure. 

Text-Guided Semantic Segmentation. Open-vocabulary scene parsing aligns image features with textual concepts to predict hierarchical labels [65]. DenseCLIP [48] introduced pixel-text alignment for dense prediction tasks, while PPL [31] incorporated probabilistic prompts to capture diverse semantic attributes. Further approaches leverage mask-level vision-language alignment [14], pixel-text score maps [48], and text-supervised segmentation frameworks [58, 64]. CoDe [58] decomposes paired image-text inputs into constituent regions and segments, enforcing region-word correspondence via contrastive learning with prompt mech-anisms. S-Seg [32] proposes leveraging pretrained models to generate pseudo-masks for supervising MaskFormer mask predictions, alongside a text encoder for query-class super-vision. SimSeg [62] enables fine-tuning of CLIP for semantic segmentation by incorporating text-image locality alignment. 

Hyperbolic Models for Segmentation. Existing hyper-bolic space segmentation frameworks primarily integrate the Poincar ´e ball model within per-pixel classification architectures. Early work [57] applied Poincar´ e embeddings to instance segmentation, while [2, 56] leveraged hyper-nym–hyponym relations from WordNet [40] for hyperbolic classification using Poincar ´e multinomial logistic regression (MLR). HyperUL [7] introduced a hyperbolic uncertainty loss to highlight ambiguous pixels based on hyperbolic distances, and HALO [20] applied hyperbolic neural networks to active learning with a radius-based acquisition score. TOPICS [27] incorporated taxonomy-based hyperbolic regularization for incremental segmentation. Recent studies have developed hyperbolic convolution operations in U-Net decoders [42] and transformer-based architectures that employ hyperbolic embeddings for pixel-level classification for medical image segmentation [55]. The [61] analyzes the differences between Euclidean and hyperbolic LoRA fine-tuning, finding that the hyperbolic for-mulation introduces a curvature-dependent length scaling in the parameter update that is better suited for hierarchical rep-resentation learning. HyperCLIP [46] extends CAT-Seg [12] by introducing a learnable scaling factor in hyperbolic space to improve vision-language alignment. From a theoretical perspective, [41] establishes the superior numerical stability of the Lorentz model through rigorous gradient analysis. Furthermore, [33] demonstrates that the Lorentz exponential map preserves ordering with respect to the Euclidean norm. The most closely related hyperbolic segmentation works are [2] and [15]. [2] adopts a sample-to-gyroplane strategy, relying on predefined WordNet hierarchies in Poincar ´espace with computationally expensive M ¨obius operations, while [15] employs a sample-to-sample strategy operating on global image-level representations via contrastive learning in Lorentz space. In particular, this work extends [25] by broadening hyperbolic semantic segmentation beyond per-pixel clas-sification to mask-classification architectures, introducing an efficient integration of the hyperbolic framework into MaskFormer-style models — a direction unexplored by prior work. Text-guided supervision is further incorporated into both architecture families, addressing the limited exploration of textual guidance in MaskFormer-style models [32]. Finally, we provide a theoretical analysis of the joint optimization of hyperbolic distance and entailment loss [15], offering gradient-level insights into the advantages of the proposed formulation over its Euclidean counterpart. 

## 3. Preliminaries 

Notation. We adopt the notation of [15, 44], ⟨· , ·⟩ L and 

∥ · ∥ L denote the Lorentzian inner product and norm, while 

⟨· ,·⟩ and ∥·∥ refer to their Euclidean operations. 

3.1. Background: Lorentz (Hyperboloid) Model 

Hyperbolic Space. Hyperbolic space is a unique, complete, and connected n-dimensional Riemannian manifold with constant negative curvature [5]. They cannot be isometrically embedded in Euclidean space Rn. Hyperbolic space can be modeled by several isometric models, of which five are well studied [39, 45]. Among them, the Poincar ´e and Lorentz (hyperboloid) models are the most widely used in practice in Deep Learning [43, 44]. 

Lorentz Model. The n-dimensional Lorentz (hyperboloid) 

Ln = ( Hn,g L) model with curvature −c (c > 0) is defined as the Riemannian manifold in (n+1) -dimensional Minkowski space R1,n (Rn+1 equipped with Lorentzian/Minkowski inner product) by 

Hn = {x ∈ R1,n : ⟨x,x⟩L = − 1

c },c > 0 (1) For x,y ∈ Rn+1 , the Lorentzian inner product is 

⟨x,y⟩L = −x0y0 +

> n

X

> i=1

xiyi, (2) 3with norm ∥x∥L = p|⟨ x,x⟩L| and for any point 

x = ( x0,x′) ∈ R1,n is x ∈ H n iff 

x0 =

q 1 

> c

+∥x′∥2. (3) 

Geodesics. Geodesics in Ln are intersections of the hy-perboloid with hyperplanes through the origin, representing the shortest path between two points. The geodesic distance between x,y ∈ L n is 

dL(x,y) = 1√c cosh −1 −c⟨x,y⟩L

. (4) 

Tangent Space. The tangent space at z ∈ L n is a linear subspace of R1,n with positive-definite metric ( ⟨v,v⟩L >0for v̸ = 0)

Tz Ln = {v ∈ R1,n : ⟨v,z⟩L = 0 } (5) Any ambient u ∈ Rn+1 can be projected onto Tz Ln by orthogonal projection in terms of the Lorentz product. 

v = proj z (u) = u−z ⟨z,u⟩L

⟨z,z⟩L

= u+cz⟨z,u⟩L. (6) 

Exponential and Logarithmic Maps. The exponential map expm z : Tz Ln → L n for vector v ∈ T z Ln

x = expm z (v) = cosh( √c∥v∥L)z+ sinh( √c∥v∥L)

√c∥v∥L

v (7) The inverse logarithmic map logm z : Ln → T z Ln is 

v = logm z (x) = cosh −1(−c⟨z,x⟩L)

p(c⟨z,x⟩L)2 −1 proj z (x). (8) 

Equivalence of the Models. Several isometric and equivalent models of hyperbolic space are widely used, with the Lorentz (hyperboloid), Poincar ´e disk, and Klein models being the most common. Each has practical advantages: the Poincar ´e disk offers intuitive visualization and uncertainty interpretation [2], the Klein model provides a simple formulation of the Einstein midpoint for averaging, and the Lorentz model is well-suited for optimization and numerical stability. Owing to their equivalence, one can leverage their respective strengths via smooth isometric mappings: 

Hn ↔ P n:

p = x′

x0

√c+1 , x0 = 1+ c∥p∥2

√c(1 −c∥p∥2) , x′ = 2p

1−c∥p∥2 .

(9) 

Hn ↔ K n:

k = x′

x0

√c , x0 = 1

pc(1 −c∥k∥2) , x′ = x0k√c.  (10) 

Kn ↔ P n:

p = k

1+ p1−c∥k∥2 , k = 2p

1+ c∥p∥2 . (11) 

Hyperbolic Averaging. In the Klein model, averaging takes the form of the Einstein midpoint: 

HypAvg (k1,..., kN ) = 

P

> i

γiki

P

> i

γi

, γi = 1

p1−c∥ki∥2 .

(12) In this work, we primarily work with the Lorentz model in Minkowski space, converting to alternative representations when beneficial. We retrieve the notation of MERU [15] by setting the temporal component x0 = xtime and the spatial component x′ = xspace ∈ Rn.

3.2. Metric Tree-likeness: Gromov δ-Hyperbolicity 

We evaluate how closely the semantic embeddings of pixels follow a tree-like structure for four datasets. For a Gromov-hyperbolic metric space, there exists a δ ≥ 0 such that every geodesic triangle is δ-slim [3, Def. 1.16]. Geodesic slimness captures negative curvature, and δ-hyperbolicity characterizes how tree-like a metric space is in terms of its metric structure [1, 24] and is used to assess the hyperbolicity of datasets and embeddings [45]. We adopt the δ-hyperbolic metric proposed in [30] to assess semantic dataset hyperbolicity. The Gromov product is defined for y,z,r (base point ) ∈ X as (y|z)r = 12

 d(r,y )+ 

d(r,z )−d(z,y ). Then, δ is the minimal value such that the following four-point condition holds for all x,y,z,r ∈ X:

(x|z)r ≥ min {(x|y)r ,(y|z)r }− δ.  (13) To compute δ, we employ the efficient fixed base point ex-act max–min product algorithm (complexity O(n2.69 )) [19]. For the matrix A of pairwise Gromov products, δ = max  

> i,j

[( A⊗

A)ij − Aij ], where (A ⊗ B)ij = max  

> k

min {Aik , B kj } [1]. Further, [30] proposed the scale-invariant metric 

δrel (X) = 2δ(X) 

> diam (X)

∈ [0 , 1] and diam (X) denotes the maximal pairwise distance. Intuitively, a small δrel indicates a space closer to a tree structure (strong hyperbolicity). 

Experiments and Findings. Due to computational constraints, we adopt batch-wise estimation of the hy-perbolicity measure delta rel across both per-pixel and mask-classification models. All models were pretrained under standard Euclidean settings. 

Per-Pixel classification models. We compute δrel on pretrained SegFormer and DeepLabV3 encoder embeddings for input images of resolution (512 × 512) from four benchmark semantic segmentation datasets. The SegFormer encoder produces four feature maps with channel dimensions 

(64 , 128 , 320 , 512) at spatial resolutions (128 , 64 , 32 , 16) ,respectively, while the DeepLabV3 encoder (ResNet-101 backbone) yields a single feature map of dimension 2048 

at 64 × 64 resolution. For each feature set and dataset, 

δrel is computed over randomly sampled batches and the average is reported in Tab. 1. The obtained δrel values are significantly closer to 0 than to 1 across all feature sets from all four datasets, indicating strong latent hyperbolicity in both models and suggesting that visual representations naturally lend themselves to hyperbolic embedding. Text embeddings similarly exhibit a tree-like organization, with an average δrel ≈ 0.3 across the four evaluated datasets. Notably, SegFormer features yield relative hyperbolicities of (0 .31 ,0.24 ,0.18 ,0.18) at successive encoder resolutions, demonstrating that coarser, lower-resolution features consis-tently exhibit stronger hyperbolicity — consistent with their 4Figure 2. (a) Label Information encoding (b) Lorentz Space Optimization for the semantic segmentation (c) Zero-shot pixel label identification (d) Model Uncertainty Estimation 

encoding of more global semantic structure. 

Mask classification models. We compute δrel on pre-trained MaskFormer and Mask2Former (base and large vari-ants) pixel-level module encoder and decoder embeddings for input images of resolution (640 ×640) from the two largest semantic segmentation datasets. For large and base variants of both models, the encoder’s last hidden state produces feature maps at a spatial resolution of (20 ×20) , with feature dimensions of 1536 and 1024 , respectively. The decoder’s last hidden state produces feature maps of dimension 256 at a spatial resolution of (160 ×160) for both variants. Results are reported in Tab. 2. Consistent with the per-pixel models, maskformer image embeddings exhibit strong hyperbolicity, with δrel values closer to 0 for both datasets. Furthermore, en-coder embeddings demonstrate a stronger tree-like structure than decoder embeddings across both datasets, attributable to their encoding of higher-level semantic label features. Additionally, large model variants exhibit marginally stronger hyperbolicity than their base counterparts.             

> Encoders Pascal-VOC [18] Cityscapes [13] ADE20K [66] COCO-Stuff [4] DeepLabV3 [8] 0.23 0.24 0.26 0.23 SegFormer [60] 0.24 0.23 0.23 0.22

Table 1. The relative delta δrel values for different semantic datasets. We compute the Euclidean distance between the encoder features and report the average over 32 randomly sampled batches of size 1024. Smaller values of δrel indicate stronger hyperbolicity 

## 4. Methodology 

Our framework enables Lorentz hyperbolic semantic segmentation for both per-pixel classification and mask-classification architectures. In per-pixel classification models, the network produces an embedding for each pixel and predicts a probability distribution over C semantic categories. Extending this formulation to the hyperbolic setting is straightforward: pixel embeddings are aligned with textual label embeddings within the Lorentz manifold, allowing per-pixel semantic supervision in hyperbolic space. In contrast, Mask classification architectures take a funda-mentally different approach, grouping pixels into N segments by predicting N binary masks alongside their corresponding category labels, enabling flexible handling of segmentation tasks. The meta-architecture consists of three components: a backbone encoder, a pixel decoder, and a transformer decoder. The backbone extracts multi-scale visual features, which are refined by the pixel decoder and consumed by the transformer                                             

> Model (Size) Module Training Data Tested on COCO Tested on ADE MaskFormer Encoder COCO 0.28 0.27 (Large) Decoder COCO 0.38 0.33 Encoder ADE 0.31 0.33 Decoder ADE 0.40 0.39 MaskFormer Encoder COCO 0.32 0.29 (Base) Decoder COCO 0.33 0.33 Encoder ADE 0.28 0.31 Decoder ADE 0.34 0.40 Mask2Former Encoder COCO 0.26 0.32 (Large) Decoder COCO 0.34 0.38 Encoder ADE 0.32 0.31 Decoder ADE 0.38 0.36

Table 2. The relative delta δrel values for different semantic datasets for trained maskformer models. Smaller values of δrel indicate stronger hyperbolicity    

> Label Relevant Classes (similarity Index) Dog cow (0.77), cat (0.74), horse (0.66), sheep (0.63) Chair couch (0.73), table (0.63), bed (0.58), ’bench (0.57)

Table 3. Semantic similarity between class descriptions: Top-4 near-est classes identified using cosine similarity scores (COCO-Stuff). 

decoder to produce N mask-feature pairs that are combined to generate the final segmentation output. While both paradigms share common objectives, their architectural differences require distinct hyperbolic formu-lations. Our approach aligns textual label representations and pixel-level visual features in a shared Lorentz embedding space, analogous to vision–language alignment. Specifically, we extend the Lorentz model to support efficient dense computations and employ entailment-cone constraints to guide pixel-level supervision. 

Label-Description Pre-processing (Fig 2(a)). For each of the C semantic classes, we define a descriptive textual representation capturing both semantic and visual attributes. These descriptions can be manually curated (e.g., bus : public transport buses, rectangular shape, windows and doors visible, often on roads, Frisbee: Flat, round plastic disc used in games; brightly colored and flies through the air when thrown.) or sourced automatically from WordNet [40] def-initions. We encode each textual description using Sentence Transformers [49], producing a dorig = 384 dimensional embedding. We perform PCA on the label features and reduce the dimension d to get the encoded class prototype xenc,i 

for the i-th class. The resulting set of C prototypes serves as semantic anchors in the embedding space for both supervised alignment and entailment cone construction. Tab. 3 shows the label similarity statistics for the resulting embeddings. 

Image Embedding. Per-pixel Model: Input images of shape [h,w, 3] are passed through a semantic segmentation network, yielding dense feature maps of shape [h,w,d ], where 

d matches the dimension of the text embeddings. For each pixel j, the corresponding feature vector is denoted yenc ,j .

Mask Classification Models: The mask-classification processes the input image through three sequential com-5(a) (b) Figure 3. Hyperbolic triangle for Y and Y1 points for pivot X in Lorentz surface. Despite Y1 being closer to X, it has higher entail-ment loss due to its direction w.r.t to X. (a) Full, (b) Zoomed view. 

ponents. First, a backbone encoder extracts multi-scale visual features, producing low-resolution feature maps at multiple output resolutions. Second, a pixel decoder progressively upsamples these low-resolution features to generate high-resolution per-pixel embeddings of shape 

[h,w,d ϵ]. Third, a transformer decoder employs N learnable queries to cross-attend to the lowest-resolution feature maps, aggregating global information about each segment. This produces N mask feature vectors of shape [N,d ϵ]. Finally, binary mask predictions are decoded by combining the per-pixel embeddings with the N mask feature vectors via dot-product attention, yielding N segment masks. 

4.1. Semantic Segmentation in Lorentz Space 

Following [15], we lift both text and image embeddings to Lorentz hyperbolic space Hn. Unlike prior work that used a single image embedding, semantic segmentation requires per-pixel embeddings, which poses computational challenges. We adopt strategies from [2] and devise efficient computational steps for the hyperbolic Lorentz model, enabling scalable pixelwise hyperbolic operations across both per-pixel and mask-classification architectures. 

4.2. Lifting to Lorentz Model 

Both text and image embeddings initially reside in ambient Euclidean space. To perform hyperbolic operations, we lift these embeddings into the Lorentz model:: 

Projection on Lorentz. Let the ambient vector be 

u = [0 , ve] (ve ∈ {xenc , yenc }). The Lorentz origin 

O = [ 1√c , 0] ∈ Rn+1 with 0 = [0 , ..., 0] ∈ Rn. Similar to [15], we consider the origin of the hyperboloid for the projection. Projection to the tangent space TO Ln is trivial since ⟨u,O⟩L = 0 , i.e., v = proj O (u) = u.

Exponential Map: v is lifted to the Lorentz model, 

h = expm O (v) ∈ H n, using the exponential map of Eq. 7 : 

h = [ h0,h′] = 

h cosh( √c∥v∥L)

√c , sinh( √c∥v∥L)

√c∥v∥L

ve

i

, (14) For memory efficiency, we precompute ∥ve∥.

4.3. Hyperbolic Similarity 

We consider two complementary similarity measures in the Lorentz model for a given anchor embedding: geodesic distance and entailment cone angle. Together, these capture both proximity and hierarchical order in hyperbolic space. 

> Figure 4. Mask former architecture adaptation for the hyperbolic model. The sample to prototype (s2p) and sample to sample (s2s) blocks are marked. The highlighted blocks show our modification from the original architectures.

Lorentz Geodesic Distance. For two embeddings in the Lorentz space xi ∈ H n and yj ∈ H n, their proximity can be measured using the Lorentz geodesic distance: 

dL(xi,yj ) = 1

√c cosh −1(−c⟨xi,yj ⟩L), (15) While negative of geodesic distance captures similarity, it does not encode hierarchical ordering between embeddings 15. 

Aperture Angle as Entailment Cone. To model hierarchi-cal relations, we employ entailment cones that enforce order constraints in hyperbolic space. Convex entailment cones on Riemannian manifolds define a partial order satisfying axial symmetry, rotational invariance, continuous aperture control, and transitivity [22]. The half-aperture angle of the cone for anchor xi is defined as 

aper (xi) = sin −1 2K

√c∥x′

> i

∥



, (16) where ∥x′

> i

∥ denotes the norm of the spatial component of the Lorentz embedding and K is a constant. 

Lorentz Exterior Angle as Entailment Similarity. For a hyperbolic triangle formed by the origin O, anchor xi, and feature embedding yj , we define the exterior angle with xi

as the pivot: 

ext (xi,yj ) = π−∠Ox iyj . (17) Ideally, ∠Ox iyj → π indicates that the feature embedding lies within the entailment cone of the anchor. Using the hyperbolic law of cosines, [15] derived the following closed-form expression: 

ext (xi,yj ) = cos −1 y0,j +x0,i c⟨xi,yj ⟩L

∥x′

> i

∥p(c⟨xi,yj ⟩L)2 −1

!

. (18) A larger exterior angle indicates weaker alignment and lower semantic similarity between the feature and the anchor. 

4.4. Model Adaptation 

Hyperbolic Per-pixel classification Models We adopt a sample-to-prototype formulation for the per-pixel model, where each pixel embedding is aligned with the corresponding class prototype in Lorentz space. Let xi = expm O ([0 ,xenc,i ]) 

denote the Lorentz embedding of the textual prototype for class i among C classes, and yj = expm O ([0 , yenc,j ]) the Lorentz embedding of pixel j. For each pixel, we compute its similarity with all class prototypes using the Lorentz geodesic distance. 

Cross-Entropy Loss in Lorentz. We use pixel-wise logits via the negative Lorentz geodesic distance to each class 6prototype. The cross entropy loss for the j-th pixel with ground-truth class i is 

lce (j) = −log   exp( −dL(xi,yj )/τ )

PCk exp( −dL(xk,yj )/τ )

. (19) where τ is a temperature parameter controlling the distribu-tion sharpness. This loss encourages each pixel embedding to be closer in Lorentz space to its corresponding class prototype than to all other prototypes. 

Lorentz Entailment Loss. The entailment loss enforces a hierarchical geometric constraint: each pixel embedding 

yj should lie within the entailment cone defined by its cor-responding class prototype xi, which acts as the conceptual anchor. The half-aperture of the cone at xi is given by Eq. 16, and the exterior angle ext (xi,yj ) is computed via Eq. 18. The entailment loss penalizes pixel embeddings that fall outside the aperture of their corresponding class cone: 

Lentail (xi,yj ) = max  0,ext (xi,yj )−aper (xi). (20) 

Final Loss: For overall loss of per-pixel models, we combine cross-entropy and entailment loss components with 

λw as a weighting factor, balancing classification accuracy and hierarchical consistency. 

L = X

> j

 lce (j)+ λwLentail (j), (21) 

Hyperbolic Mask classification Models We extend MaskFormer-style architectures (e.g., MaskFormer and Mask2Former) to the Lorentz manifold with minimal architectural changes. Mask-classification models predict a set of N binary masks and associate each mask with a se-mantic category. Our formulation introduces two hyperbolic components: (i) a sample-to-prototype formulation for class prediction, and (ii) a sample-to-sample formulation for mask generation, as depicted in figure 4. 

Class Query Logits (Sample-to-Prototype). In the orig-inal (Euclidean) MaskFormer, a linear classifier followed by a softmax predicts class probabilities over C categories for N

decoder query embeddings. We replace this with a hyperbolic sample-to-prototype formulation that enables text-guided supervision. Let xi denote the Lorentz embedding of the i-th class prototype ( i = 1 ,...,C ), and qj denote the Lorentz embed-ding of the j-th query ( j = 1 ,...,N ) obtained via exponential mapping, and . We compute the class-query logits as follows: 

qij = −wddL(xi,qj )−max  0,ext (xi,qj )−aper (xi),

(22) producing a logit matrix Q ∈ RN ×C . The distance term is scaled by wd to balance its range with the entailment component. Softmax over the C classes yields the class probabilities for each query. 

Mask Query Logits (Sample-to-Sample). In the Eu-clidean formulation, mask logits are obtained via a Euclidean dot product between N mask query embeddings (N,d ϵ) and a dϵ-dimensional high-resolution per-pixel feature map of 

(h, w ). We replace this with hyperbolic similarity between mask embeddings and pixel features. Let mi denote the Lorentz embedding of the i-th mask query and pe the Lorentz embedding of the pixel decoder output. For each query, we compute distance- and angle-based similarities: 

mdi = −dL(mi,pe)+ bd

sd

, mai = −ext (mi,pe)+ ba

sa

,

(23) where bd,b a are bias terms that shift the distance and angle values into a suitable range for sigmoid activation, and sd,s a

are scaling parameters controlling sensitivity. The final mask logits for query i are: 

mqi = mdi +mai , (24) Where each m∗ 

> i

∈ Rh×w. Applying a sigmoid function produces the N predicted binary masks for i = 1 ,...,N .

Loss Optimization. The network is trained using the standard mask-classification objective. Predicted masks are first matched to ground-truth annotations via bipartite Hun-garian matching to obtain the optimal query-to-annotation assignment. The total loss comprises a cross-entropy term for class prediction and focal and dice loss terms for mask prediction, applied to the matched pairs. 

Efficient Computation. The prototype distance cross-entropy and entailment losses rely on repeated computations. We precompute per-pixel x0, x′, c⟨x, y⟩L, and ∥x′∥ =px20 −1/c for memory-efficient hyperbolic operations. 

Efficiency over Poincar ´e. Compared to [2,56], our Lorentz solution is substantially more efficient. Previous sample-to-gyroplane formulation in the Poincar ´e ball requires computationally expensive M ¨obius additions with gyroplane offsets and dot products with gyroplane orientations for pixel-wise class probability estimation [23]. In contrast, our approach in the Lorentz model requires only a single Lorentz inner product—equivalent to a Euclidean dot product with a sign reversal on the time-like component—thereby yielding a major computational advantage. 

4.5. Gradient Analysis 

We analyze the gradient behavior of the Lorentz hyperbolic distance and entailment losses to characterize how hyperbolic operations shape the learning dynamics relative to a purely Euclidean setting. 

Gradient Interaction. We study the interaction between angle- and distance-based losses in the Lorentz model. Let 

L = ⟨x,y⟩L. The cosine similarity between their gradients is governed by sign(( −x0L)−y0) (see appendix). The sign determines whether the objectives exhibit gradient affinity 

(positive cosine similarity) or conflict (negative cosine similarity) [17, 54, 63]. In a multi-task setting, two loss components are said to exhibit gradient affinity when their cosine similarity is positive [17,54], accelerating joint optimization, and gradient conflict when their cosine similarity is negative [63], slowing convergence. We establish the following result for the joint hyperbolic distance and entailment losses: 7Theorem. The cosine similarity between the gradients of the distance and entailment loss components is determined by 

sign(( −x0L)−y0), where L = ⟨x,y⟩L.When sign(( −x0L)−y0) > 0, gradients are aligned (angle 

< 90 ◦), leading to synergistic updates and faster convergence. When negative, typically near uncertain regions (e.g., x0 < y 0

with higher L), gradients conflict, resulting in smaller updates. In contrast, Euclidean counterparts remain orthogonal, yielding zero cosine similarity and uniform interaction. This position-dependent interaction induces implicit adaptive gradient update regions: uncertain regions receive conservative updates, while confident regions benefit from accelerated optimization, consistent with prior findings on gradient affinity [35]. Our observations align with [21], which reports self-paced behavior in hyperbolic Poincar ´e embed-dings. Similarly, we observe stronger gradients for both loss components near ground-truth regions in the Lorentz model. 

Gradient Coupling via the Exponential Map. Unlike Euclidean space, hyperbolic embeddings introduce globally coupled gradients via the exponential map. For tangent vector 

v and Lorentz embedding x:

∂x j

∂v l

= δjl 

|v| sinh( |v|)+ vj vl

|v|2



cosh( |v|)− sinh( |v|)

|v|



.

(25) The diagonal term is always positive, while the cross-term depends on vj vl as cosh( |v|) − sinh( |v|) 

> |v|

> 0. Consequently, each tangent space coordinate influences all hyperbolic embedding coordinates, and conversely, the gradient of any hyperbolic coordinate propagates back to all tangent space co-ordinates. Such dependencies are absent in Euclidean space. 

Empirical Analysis. To isolate and verify these theoretical findings, we conduct simplified gradient experiments in which a target prototype is fixed, and gradients are computed after the exponential map with respect to both the hyperbolic embeddings and the Euclidean tangent space coordinates, under the distance and entailment losses separately. We visualize the resulting gradient directions and magnitudes in 2D to illustrate differences in loss landscapes and gradient fields, confirming: (i) Euclidean gradients of the distance and entailment losses are orthogonal; (ii) hyperbolic gradients exhibit location-dependent relative angles governed by the sign condition above; and (iii) both distance and angle-based losses yield higher gradient magnitudes near ground-truth regions, providing empirical evidence of adaptive, self-paced learning in the Lorentz model. 

## 5. Experiment and Results 

Datasets. We evaluate on four standard semantic segmen-tation benchmark datasets. (i) ADE20K [66] contains 151 indoor and outdoor categories spanning natural scenes, arti-facts, vehicles, food, and animals. (ii) COCO-Stuff 164K [4] extends MS COCO [37] with pixel-level annotations for 182 object and “stuff” classes such as sky, grass, and road. (iii) Pascal VOC 2012 [18] includes 20 object categories covering everyday objects, animals, and vehicles. (iv) Cityscapes [13] (a) (b) (i) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h)    

> Figure 5. Directions for the (a) Euclidean distance (blue) and Entailment (red), (c) Lorentz distance (blue) and Entailment (red), (b) Sign of the gradients cosine similarity. ||∇L angle ||
> and ||∇L distance || for Euclidean w.r.t coordinates (d) and (g), hyperbolic w.r.t the tangent coordinates (e) and (h), hyperbolic w.r.t the exponential map coordinates (f) and (i).

provides fine-grained annotations for urban street scenes with categories such as road, vehicles, and pedestrians. For each dataset, we incorporate visual-semantic textual descriptions for all labels. 

Per-Pixel Classification Models. We evaluate our frame-work on two SOTA representative per-pixel classification architectures. DeepLabV3 [8] employs atrous spatial pyramid pooling to capture multi-scale contextual information. It sup-ports several backbone variants; in our experiments, we adopt a ResNet-101 backbone pretrained on Pascal VOC [18]. Seg-Former [60] is a transformer-based segmentation model com-bining a hierarchical Transformer encoder with a lightweight decoder for efficient dense prediction. We adopt the B3 and B4 backbone variants, pretrained on ADE20K [66]. 

Mask Classification Models. We consider two state-of-the-art semantic segmentation architectures for mask clas-sification. MaskFormer [11], inspired by DETR [6], unifies semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation under a mask-classification framework. We adopt base and large model variants with Swin Transformer [38] backbones, with models pretrained on ADE20K and COCO-Stuff. Mask2Former [10] extends MaskFormer by introducing masked attention, a variant of cross attention that iteratively attends within the region of the predicted mask for each query, in the transformer decoder, and leveraging multi-scale high-resolution features, improving efficiency and segmentation accuracy. We evaluate base and large versions with Swin Transformer backbones pretrained on ADE20K and COCO-Stuff. 

Implementation Details Per-Pixel Models. All images 8are resized to 512 × 512 with standard ImageNet normal-ization. To stabilize hyperbolic computations, we clamp feature magnitudes and apply weight decay during training. Following [15], we introduce learnable scaling parameters 

αtxt and αimg for text and image embeddings, initialized as the inverse of their mean feature norms. For per-pixel models, a pretrained encoder (SegFormer or DeepLabV3) is coupled with a customized decoder head to handle class mismatch, feature alignment with text embeddings, and output interpolation. Sentence embeddings are generated using the BAAI/bge-m3 model; base and large variants yield similar performance. After lifting to the Lorentz model, image embeddings have shape [B,H,W,d +1] and text embeddings 

[C, d + 1] , producing logits [B, H, W, C ] via the negative Lorentzian inner product. Training uses AdamW with weight decay, employing a smaller learning rate for the encoder and a larger one for the decoder. The embedding dimension is set to 

d = 8 for Cityscapes and Pascal VOC, and d = 64 for ADE20K and COCO-Stuff. The entailment loss weight is λw = 0 .5.

Mask Classification Models. Mask2Former architectures by replacing the linear classifier with hyperbolic prototype matching in the Lorentz model to compute class query logits, and by replacing the Euclidean dot product with hyperbolic sample-to-sample similarity to compute mask query logits, as described in Sec . 4. For class prototype construction, text prototypes are scaled by their mean norms to produce embeddings of unit tangent-space norm, which are then lifted via the exponential map. At unit tangent-space norm, the half-aperture angle evaluates to: aper ≈ sin −1 2×0.1sinh(1) 



≈ 0.17 rad . After normalization and mapping, the mean geodesic distance between class prototypes is 4.1 ± 0.2, confirming well-separated class anchors in hyperbolic space. Noting that cosh −1(2) ≈ 1,enforcing a unit-radius constraint on the anchor embeddings bounds the Lorentz inner product to the range [-2, -1]. For mask query logit computation, the shift and scale parameters of Eq. 23 are set as follows. The angle shift is set to ba = 0 .17 , consistent with the aperture value for a unit-norm Lorentzian tangent, such that embeddings near the cone boundary are mapped to zero before sigmoid activation. To ensure confident mask activations, the angle scale is set to sa = 0 .02 , mapping the shifted exterior angle range of 

(−π + 0 .17 ,0.17) , which maps exterior angular similarities corresponding to 0−0.13 radians to sigmoid outputs greater than 0.9. The distance shift is set to bd = 1 , and the distance scale to sd = 0 .1, such that pixel embeddings with a shifted negative distance in the range (0 .22 , 1) , corresponding to a geodesic distance of at most 0.78 , yield sigmoid activations above 0.9. For Mask2Former, we extend the same hyperbolic similarity formulation to the masked attention module, enabling iterative mask refinement using hyperbolic operations. Training follows the standard MaskFormer optimization procedure, including Hungarian matching for query–ground-truth assignment, cross-entropy loss for classification, and focal and Dice losses for mask supervision.   

> Figure 6. Qualitative segmentation results across Citiscapes, Pascal-VOC, Ade20k, and COCO-Stuff test samples.
> Figure 7. Qualitative segmentation and angle-based boundary detection by mask2former on ADE20K data samples.

Evaluation Metrics: We report the standard single-scale mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) for semantic seg-mentation, where IoU measures the spatial overlap between predicted and ground-truth masks, averaged over all classes without test-time augmentation. To assess hierarchical consistency, we additionally introduce sibling and cousin mIoU variants based on WordNet hypernym–hyponym relations (e.g., car –bus under vehicle ) [2]. All per-pixel experiments use single-stage inference on 512 ×512 images with SegFormer and DeepLabV3 backbones across ADE20K, COCO-Stuff, Pascal-VOC, and Cityscapes. For mask-classification architectures (MaskFormer and Mask2Former), experiments are conducted on 640 × 640 images using ADE20K and COCO-Stuff pretrained models, evaluating both base and large variants. Beyond standard mIoU, we assess cross-dataset generalization, hierarchical consistency, uncertainty estimation, and boundary delineation, and pro-vide qualitative visualizations with comparisons to relevant baselines. We omit SegFormer fine-tuning on Pascal-VOC due to its limited size, and do not fine-tune MaskFormer models on Cityscapes or Pascal-VOC for the same reason. 9Figure 8. Qualitative segmentation and angle-based boundary detection by mask2former on Coco-stuff data samples. 1st row semantic mask, 2nd row angle based uq, 3rd row, distance based uq. 

5.1. Semantic Segmentation Performance 

Our Lorentz semantic segmentation framework supports two inference strategies. The first follows the conventional approach of assigning each pixel to the class prototype with the minimal geodesic distance, i.e., argmin 

> i

dL(xi,yj )

for the j-th pixel embedding. Alternatively, we introduce a hierarchical inference strategy that selects the prototype with the minimal exterior angle, argmin 

> i

ext (xi,yj ) (Eq. 18), enforcing an is-a relationship consistent with entailment-based embeddings. Both approaches yield highly similar segmentation maps; unless otherwise stated, we report results using the distance-based method. For mask-classification models, query class logits and mask query logits are computed using the proposed hyper-bolic similarity formulation. During inference, the predicted class logits (N,C ) and mask logits (h,w,N ) are combined using the standard MaskFormer strategy to obtain the final segmentation map (h,w,C ).We evaluate our approach using PCA-reduced sentence embeddings with dimension d = 64 for ADE20K and COCO-Stuff, and d = 8 for Pascal-VOC and Cityscapes. Our text-supervised Lorentzian embeddings achieve accuracy comparable to Euclidean embedding models while remaining competitive with existing text-supervised semantic segmenta-tion methods, despite using substantially lower-dimensional prototypes (Table 4). Representative qualitative results across datasets and models are shown in the main paper, with additional experiments and ablations provided in the supplementary material. 

5.2. Uncertainty and confidence 

Uncertainty Estimation for the Maskformer, Zero-shot, New Architecture diagram. Results: new table diagram. Hyperbolic embeddings offer geometrically interpretable predictions, making them particularly attractive for uncer-Method Pascal-VOC [18] Cityscapes [13] ADE20K [66] COCO-Stuff [4] DeepLabV3 85.7 80.1 42.7 38 SegFormer (B3) 81.7 49.4 45.5 SegFormer (B4) 82.3 50.3 46.5 MaskFormer Swin B 51.1 51.1 MaskFormer Swin L 54.1 52.7 Mask2Former Swin L 56.1 MTA-clip (R101) 49.8 MTA-clip (ViT-B) 82.1 52.3 DenseClip (R101) 81 45.1 DenseClip (ViT-B) 50.6 MTA-clip (MiT-B4) 51.7 Ours (Deeplab-R101) 84.8 80.6 43.4 41.5 Ours (SegFormer-B3) 83.7 50.1 47.2 Ours (MaskFormer SB) 51.8 48.6 Ours (MaskFormer SL) 54.5 50.1 Ours (Mask2Former SL) 56.7 51.6 

Table 4. Quantitative results on ADE20K, COCO-Stuff, Pascal-VOC, and Cityscapes. We compare mIoU for Lorentzian embeddings with relevant baselines. Our framework achieves competitive or superior performance across datasets with minimal computational overhead. 

Figure 9. Single Pass Uncertainty Estimation using Mask classifi-cation models. 

Figure 10. Text query-based segmentation using mask classification models. 

tainty quantification [7, 43, 44]. Our framework enables pixel-level uncertainty estimation without requiring ground-truth labels, providing insight into both prediction confidence and semantic boundary structure. We identify two comple-mentary families of uncertainty measures in Lorentz space: 

length-based and angle-based .

Connection with Distance-based Uncertainty. Follow-ing [2], we investigate whether Lorentz embeddings preserve the length-order properties of Poincar ´e embeddings under the isometric mapping. The Lorentz-to-Poincar ´e projection (Eq. 9) yields uncertainty maps based on radial distance from the origin, where lower radius corresponds to higher uncertainty, with elevated uncertainty consistently concen-trated along semantic boundaries — consistent with prior findings [2, 30]. Furthermore, both the Lorentz-to-Poincar ´eand Euclidean-to-Lorentz mappings (Eq. 14) preserve length order, permitting direct use of the Euclidean norm ∥x′∥ or the time component x0 as a prototype-free uncertainty metric, consistent with the findings of [44]. 

Novel Angle-based Uncertainty. We introduce a com-plementary angle-based uncertainty measure enabled by the entailment loss, which constrains pixel embeddings to lie 10 Figure 11. Hierarchical Class retrieval example from COCO-Stuff. From Left, retrieved map by table, furniture, and chair classes for the same images. Similarly, retrieved the map by Zebra, Novel text: 

Wild Animal , and Giraffe classes. 

within the entailment cone of their label prototypes or mask embeddings. For per-pixel classification models, we compute the minimal exterior angle between each pixel embedding and the set of class prototypes, min  

> i

ext (xi,yj ). Larger angles indicate stronger deviations from the prototype entailment cone and therefore lower confidence in the predicted class. This prototype-aware metric naturally reflects the hierarchical is-a structure encoded by the entailment formulation [44, 53]. For mask-classification models, we compute the exterior angle between each pixel embedding and the set of N mask embeddings predicted by the decoder. For each of the (h,w ) pixels, we evaluate N angles relative to the mask embeddings and take the minimum as the uncertainty value (Fig. 9). This value reflects how strongly the pixel aligns with its closest mask anchor (Fig. 7). Pixels exhibiting higher minimum exterior angles tend to align with multiple mask queries, indicating boundary ambiguity and elevated prediction uncertainty. While distance-based similarity can also be used for this purpose, we empirically observe that the angle-based measure provides clearer boundary localization in mask classification models. Empirically, uncertain pixels consistently fall outside the expected entailment cone, violating order-embedding con-straints and admitting a geometric interpretation of epistemic uncertainty in hyperbolic space. The angle-based measure complements distance-based uncertainty by offering aprototype-conditioned perspective on prediction confidence. 

Finding Object Confidence. We localize confident regions by computing classwise confidence using averaged features in the Klein model for efficiency. Pixel embeddings of a selected class are mapped to Klein space 10, averaged via the Einstein midpoint 12, and mapped back to Lorentz space to obtain the class mean ym. Confidence heatmaps are then generated using either exp( −dL(yj ,ym)) or exterior angle deviations from ym, capturing both feature-level similarity and geometric alignment with the class prototype or mask embeddings cones. We hypothesize that distance-based measures primarily re-flect aleatory uncertainty , capturing variability in feature em-beddings and inherent data noise, whereas angle-based mea-sures capture epistemic uncertainty , reflecting the confidence of embeddings relative to the semantic prototypes and hierar-chy. A formal theoretical characterization of this distinction is beyond the scope of this work and is left for future study. 

5.3. Beyond trained-set performance: 

We investigate the ability of our Lorentz embedding to generalize toward hierarchical semantic retrieval and zero-

Figure 12. Retrieving Class map using relevant classes. From left, Zebra image using Zebra and Horse query. An image with the query of flower, vase, and potted flower. Image [orange] [apple] [fruit] [shelf]                

> 0.04 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.10
> Pixel Intensity
> 0
> 150
> 300
> Density  orange
> 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09
> Pixel Intensity
> 0
> 150
> 300
> Density  apple
> 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.08
> Pixel Intensity
> 0
> 150
> 300
> Density  fruit
> 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06
> Pixel Intensity
> 0
> 300
> 600
> Density  shelf

Figure 13. Image mask captured by different keywords. We point to the corresponding histogram; the accurate class text has the highest confidence, and so on (more results in the supplementary section). 

shot learning beyond the trained label set. For unseen classes, we follow the same label processing pipeline: we provide semantic descriptions, compute sentence embeddings, and apply the PCA transformation trained on labeled classes to obtain low-dimensional prototypes for novel classes. 

Hierarchical Retrieval. We analyze the hierarchical 

behavior of our model for hypernym–hyponym relationships and visually similar classes (e.g., car–truck, goat–sheep). Leveraging the entailment-based training objective, our Lorentz embedding naturally captures hierarchical structures, enabling the retrieval of semantically related classes from text queries. For example, “vehicle” retrieves bus and car, “flying things” retrieves aeroplane, frisbee, kite, and bird, while cow, sheep, and goat cluster under “animal.” WordNet hypernym queries further confirm alignment with linguistic hierarchies. We provide sample results for COCO-Stuff in figure 11. 

Text-based Semantic Retrieval. For per-pixel classi-fication models, an input text description is embedded and projected into Lorentz space, and pixels are retrieved by nearest-prototype matching, as illustrated in Fig. 2(c). For mask-classification models (Fig. 10(c)), the input text embedding is matched against the N class query embeddings in hyperbolic space via the sample-to-prototype similarity, identifying the closest query. The corresponding mask embedding is then used to generate the retrieved semantic mask for the text query via Lorentz similarity. For instance, “two-wheeled vehicles” retrieves bicycle and motorcycle, “wild animals” retrieves zebra, giraffe, and bear, “domestic animals” retrieves dog, horse, and cat, and “indoor furniture” retrieves cabinet, desk, and chair (Fig. 11). Top-k retrieval consistently yields semantically coherent results, such as horse–zebra, plane–bird, and cow–sheep–goat clusters. 

Cross-label Retrieval. Our model can retrieve semanti-cally related classes using similar text queries, demonstrating its ability to capture structural relevance (Fig. 12). For example, a bird mask may be retrieved by an “aeroplane” query, a zebra mask by a “horse” query, or a sheep mask by a “goat” query. However, such cases exhibit a large exterior angle ext (xbird , yplane ), indicating semantic deviation and 11 Figure 14. Higher Uncertainty for the zero-shot retrieved objects (dis-tance & angle). Sheep, train, and Rider pixels have higher uncertainty.   

> Figure 15. Visualization of Loss Geometry for a R1,2Lorentz Model (a) entailment loss, (b) Geodesic distance loss, (c) and (d) Weighed sum of the losses from two sides

high epistemic uncertainty. Both distance- and angle-based metrics capture this behavior, highlighting the robustness of our uncertainty estimation. 

Zero-shot Performance. We investigate the zero-shot seg-mentation performance of our model using visual descriptions and the Lorentzian is-a hierarchical relationship. Specifi-cally, we evaluate scenarios where certain classes are withheld during training under two settings: (i) the Pascal-VOC 15/5 split following [2, 59], and (ii) Cityscapes zero-shot, where a COCO-Stuff–pretrained DeepLabV3 model omits bicycle, sidewalk, rider, and fence classes. In inference, textual descrip-tions of unseen classes are provided to infer semantic masks. Results (Tab. 5 and Fig. 14) demonstrate that our model achieves competitive zero-shot segmentation performance, successfully retrieving novel classes while naturally assigning higher uncertainty to regions containing unseen semantics. These experiments demonstrate that text supervision in Lorentz embeddings enables hierarchical embedding learning, semantic generalization, and zero-shot recognition. CE ( Rn) Rn (proto) Poincar´ e [2] Ours ( R1,n )mIOU 2.5 18.6 34.9 36.4 (8-d) Uncertainty ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓                 

> ’is-a ’ relation ✗✗✗✓
> Computation High Text-query ✗✓✗✓
> Hierarchical ✗✗✓✓
> Table 5. Zero-shot result comparison for Pascal-VOC using DeepLabV3 (resnet-101) backbone. R stands for Euclidean network. Comparison with other benefits.

5.4. Loss Landscape Geometry 

We empirically analyze the loss geometry of our Lorentz framework to understand its learning dynamics. Fig. 15 visually depicts the geodesic distance loss and the entailment loss in a R1,2 Lorentz model. The geodesic distance loss (Fig. 15b) acts as a hyperbolic ”geodesic circles” around the proto-type, analogous to a Euclidean circle. It enforces proximity to class prototypes without directional constraints—resulting in a geodesic circle loss surface. The entailment cone loss (Fig. 15a) provides a directional inductive bias by encouraging embeddings to fall within the entailment cone defined by prototypes’ location, consistent with the hierarchical is-a 

relationship. Their weighted sum creates a complex loss (a) (b) (c) (d)     

> Figure 16. Loss surface Visualization for DeepLabV3 cityscape (a) H(b) R, SegFormer COCO-Stuff (c) H(d) R. Empirical visualization shows that Lorentz model consistently achieves smoother loss than Euclidean.

landscape (15(c,d)), which encourages the embedding to fall in the entailment cone while being near the prototypes. Following filter normalization [36], we perturb model weights along two random directions to visualize the loss surfaces. Our empirical observation reveals that the Lorentz model converges to flatter minima than its Euclidean counterpart (fig 16), aligning with the well-known link between flat minima and improved generalization [16, 29], and explaining its strong empirical performance. A detailed analysis of the loss gradients lies beyond the scope of this paper and will be explored in future work. In particular, we plan to investigate why hyperbolic embeddings exhibit such behavior and how the choice of Lorentz hyperbolic space and loss functions influences the optimization dynamics. 

5.5. Ablation Studies 

We conduct extensive studies on different components. 

Text Encoding. We evaluate multiple sentence encoding strategies, comparing distributional embeddings (WordNet + GloVe) with contextual embeddings obtained from trans-former encoders. Contextual embeddings consistently outper-form distributional counterparts, as they better capture seman-tic information. We further examine the effect of varying text descriptions and observe that adding or modifying words has minimal impact on the resulting embeddings since sentence encoders produce semantically consistent representations. 

Embedding Dimensionality. We analyze the impact of embedding dimensionality on performance. While Lorentz embeddings maintain stable performance across dimensions, Euclidean embeddings degrade in segmentation performance as the dimensionality decreases. Notably, the Lorentz model achieves competitive performance on both segmentation architectures even with lower dimensions, showcasing its geometric efficiency. 

Model Architectures. We test scalability across archi-tectures by using DeepLabV3 (ResNet-50, ResNet-101), SegFormer (MiT-B3, MiT-B4), Maskformers (base and Large models). Our model consistently performs well across all datasets and architectures, demonstrating robustness and general applicability. We observe similar results for mask classification models. 

Loss Component Analysis. We isolate the contribution of each loss term. Without the entailment loss, embeddings converge toward prototypes from arbitrary directions, losing the semantic is-a hierarchy encoded via order embeddings and eliminating angle-based uncertainty estimation. Nev-12 ertheless, hyperbolic distance-only training still matches Euclidean ones under the same conditions. 

Mask former Modification Analysis. We investigate the contribution of maskformer angle and distance components. The angle entailment and hyperbolic Lorentz distances combine to capture the is-a hierarchy. While generating the mask, both components provide the relation with the pixels embedding with the text prototypes in a sample-to-sample fashion instead of directly in a sample-to-prototype fashion in pixel classification models. 

Euclidean Baseline. Replacing hyperbolic space with Euclidean ( Rn) degrades performance for zero-shot retrieval, where Euclidean prototypes ( Rn (Proto)) fail to preserve hierarchical relationships, dropping zero-shot performance (Tab. 5). Further, text-supervised (R(proto)) or traditional cross-entropy supervised ( Rn) models do not provide uncertainty estimates. In contrast, our Lorentz framework on different segmentation architectures consistently captures semantic hierarchies and uncertainty via its geometric inductive bias, confirming the necessity of hyperbolic geometry for robust generalization. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We presented a text-supervised hyperbolic semantic segmentation framework in the Lorentz model that enables scalable pixel-level learning across both per-pixel and mask-classification architectures. By introducing an entailment cone loss, our approach models each pixel or mask embedding as an instance of its corresponding class prototype, capturing hierarchical is-a relationships while remaining fully compatible with modern segmentation pipelines. Beyond strong empirical performance across multiple benchmarks, our analysis shows that hyperbolic representations provide structured inductive biases that improve hierarchical consis-tency, zero-shot generalization, uncertainty estimation, and representational efficiency, particularly in low-dimensional regimes. Furthermore, our findings suggest that the benefits of hyperbolic geometry extend beyond representation capacity to influence optimization dynamics and learning behavior. These results point to several promising directions for future work, including integrating hyperbolic geometry with large-scale multimodal pretraining, developing a deeper the-oretical understanding of optimization in curved spaces, and extending these ideas to broader structured prediction tasks. 

Acknowledgement: This work has been partially sup-ported by ONR Grant #N00014-23-1-2119, U.S. Army Grant #W911NF2120076,NSF CAREER Grant #1750936, NSF CNS EAGER Grant #2233879, NSF IIS Grant #2509680, and U.S. Army Grant #W911NF2410367. 

## References 

[1] Aaron B Adcock, Blair D Sullivan, and Michael W Mahoney. Tree-like structure in large social and information networks. In 2013 IEEE 13th international conference on data mining ,pages 1–10. IEEE, 2013. 4 [2] Mina Ghadimi Atigh, Julian Schoep, Erman Acar, Nanne Van Noord, and Pascal Mettes. Hyperbolic image segmenta-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4453–4462, 2022. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12 [3] Martin R Bridson and Andr ´e Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature , volume 319. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. 4 [4] Holger Caesar, Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari. Coco-stuff: Thing and stuff classes in context. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 1209–1218, 2018. 5, 8, 10 [5] James W Cannon, William J Floyd, Richard Kenyon, Walter R Parry, et al. Hyperbolic geometry. Flavors of geometry ,31(59-115):2, 1997. 3 [6] Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European confer-ence on computer vision , pages 213–229. Springer, 2020. 2, 8 [7] Bike Chen, Wei Peng, Xiaofeng Cao, and Juha R ¨oning. Hyperbolic uncertainty aware semantic segmentation. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,25(2):1275–1290, 2023. 2, 3, 10 [8] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 , 2017. 2, 5, 8 [9] Liang-Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 801–818, 2018. 1 [10] Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-attention mask trans-former for universal image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1290–1299, 2022. 1, 2, 8 [11] Bowen Cheng, Alex Schwing, and Alexander Kirillov. Per-pixel classification is not all you need for semantic segmentation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:17864–17875, 2021. 1, 2, 8 [12] Seokju Cho, Heeseong Shin, Sunghwan Hong, Anurag Arnab, Paul Hongsuck Seo, and Seungryong Kim. Cat-seg: Cost aggregation for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4113–4123, 2024. 3 [13] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 3213–3223, 2016. 5, 8, 10 [14] Anurag Das, Xinting Hu, Li Jiang, and Bernt Schiele. Mta-clip: Language-guided semantic segmentation with mask-text alignment. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 39–56. Springer, 2024. 1, 3 [15] Karan Desai, Maximilian Nickel, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Justin Johnson, and Shanmukha Ramakrishna Vedantam. Hyperbolic image-text representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 7694–7731. PMLR, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 

13 [16] Laurent Dinh, Razvan Pascanu, Samy Bengio, and Yoshua Bengio. Sharp minima can generalize for deep nets. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1019–1028. PMLR, 2017. 12 [17] Yunshu Du, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Siddhant M Jayakumar, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Razvan Pascanu, and Balaji Lakshmi-narayanan. Adapting auxiliary losses using gradient similarity. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02224 , 2018. 7 [18] Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. International journal of computer vision , 88(2):303–338, 2010. 5, 8, 10 [19] Herv ´e Fournier, Anas Ismail, and Antoine Vigneron. Com-puting the gromov hyperbolicity of a discrete metric space. 

Information Processing Letters , 115(6-8):576–579, 2015. 4 [20] Luca Franco, Paolo Mandica, Konstantinos Kallidromitis, Devin Guillory, Yu-Teng Li, Trevor Darrell, and Fabio Galasso. Hyperbolic active learning for semantic segmentation under domain shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11180 , 2023. 3 [21] Luca Franco, Paolo Mandica, Bharti Munjal, and Fabio Galasso. Hyperbolic self-paced learning for self-supervised skeleton-based action representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06242 , 2023. 8 [22] Octavian Ganea, Gary B ´ecigneul, and Thomas Hofmann. Hyperbolic entailment cones for learning hierarchical embed-dings. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1646–1655. PMLR, 2018. 2, 3, 6 [23] Octavian Ganea, Gary B ´ecigneul, and Thomas Hofmann. Hyperbolic neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. 7 [24] Mikhael Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory , pages 75–263. Springer, 1987. 4 [25] Zahid Hasan, Masud Ahmed, and Nirmalya Roy. Lorentz entailment cone for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 5216–5225, 2026. 2, 3 [26] Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Doll ´ar, and Ross Gir-shick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2961–2969, 2017. 2 [27] Julia Hindel, Daniele Cattaneo, and Abhinav Valada. Taxonomy-aware continual semantic segmentation in hyper-bolic spaces for open-world perception. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. 3 [28] Sarah Ibrahimi, Mina Ghadimi Atigh, Nanne Van Noord, Pascal Mettes, and Marcel Worring. Intriguing properties of hyperbolic embeddings in vision-language models. 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. 2 [29] Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04836 , 2016. 12 [30] Valentin Khrulkov, Leyla Mirvakhabova, Evgeniya Ustinova, Ivan Oseledets, and Victor Lempitsky. Hyperbolic image embeddings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6418–6428, 2020. 2, 4, 10 [31] Hyeongjun Kwon, Taeyong Song, Somi Jeong, Jin Kim, Jinhyun Jang, and Kwanghoon Sohn. Probabilistic prompt learning for dense prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6768–6777, 2023. 3 [32] Zihang Lai. Exploring simple open-vocabulary semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 30221–30230, 2025. 3 [33] Marc Law, Renjie Liao, Jake Snell, and Richard Zemel. Lorentzian distance learning for hyperbolic representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3672–3681. PMLR, 2019. 3 [34] Matt Le, Stephen Roller, Laetitia Papaxanthos, Douwe Kiela, and Maximilian Nickel. Inferring concept hierarchies from text corpora via hyperbolic embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00913 , 2019. 3 [35] Dongyue Li, Aneesh Sharma, and Hongyang R Zhang. Scalable multitask learning using gradient-based estimation of task affinity. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 1542–1553, 2024. 8 [36] Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. 12 [37] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll ´ar, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In 

European conference on computer vision , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. 8 [38] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 10012–10022, 2021. 8 [39] Pascal Mettes, Mina Ghadimi Atigh, Martin Keller-Ressel, Jeffrey Gu, and Serena Yeung. Hyperbolic deep learning in computer vision: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision , 132(9):3484–3508, 2024. 3 [40] George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. 

Communications of the ACM , 38(11):39–41, 1995. 3, 5 [41] Gal Mishne, Zhengchao Wan, Yusu Wang, and Sheng Yang. The numerical stability of hyperbolic representation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 24925–24949. PMLR, 2023. 3 [42] Swasti Shreya Mishra, Max van Spengler, Erwin Berkhout, and Pascal Mettes. Hyperbolic u-net for robust medical image seg-mentation. In Medical Imaging with Deep Learning , 2026. 3 [43] Maximillian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. Poincar ´e embeddings for learning hierarchical representations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 2, 3, 10 [44] Maximillian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. Learning continuous hierarchies in the lorentz model of hyperbolic geometry. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3779–3788. PMLR, 2018. 2, 3, 10, 11 [45] Wei Peng, Tuomas Varanka, Abdelrahman Mostafa, Henglin Shi, and Guoying Zhao. Hyperbolic deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 44(12):10023–10044, 2021. 3, 4 [46] Zelin Peng, Zhengqin Xu, Zhilin Zeng, Changsong Wen, Yu Huang, Menglin Yang, Feilong Tang, and Wei Shen. Understanding fine-tuning clip for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation in hyperbolic space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4562–4572, 2025. 3 

14 [47] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. 1 [48] Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Guangyi Chen, Yansong Tang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Denseclip: Language-guided dense prediction with context-aware prompt-ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18082–18091, 2022. 1, 3 [49] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 , 2019. 5 [50] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. 2 [51] Frederic Sala, Chris De Sa, Albert Gu, and Christopher R ´e. Representation tradeoffs for hyperbolic embeddings. In International conference on machine learning , pages 4460–4469. PMLR, 2018. 3 [52] Rik Sarkar. Low distortion delaunay embedding of trees in hyperbolic plane. In International symposium on graph drawing , pages 355–366. Springer, 2011. 3 [53] Ivan Vendrov, Ryan Kiros, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. Order-embeddings of images and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06361 , 2015. 2, 3, 11 [54] Tu Vu, Brian Lester, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, and Daniel Cer. Spot: Better frozen model adaptation through soft prompt transfer. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5039–5059, 2022. 7 [55] Zijian Wang, Haimei Lu, Haixin Yan, Hongxing Kan, and Li Jin. Vison transformer adapter-based hyperbolic embed-dings for multi-lesion segmentation in diabetic retinopathy. 

Scientific reports , 13(1):11178, 2023. 3 [56] Simon Weber, Bar Z ¨ong ¨ur, Nikita Araslanov, and Daniel Cremers. Flattening the parent bias: Hierarchical semantic segmentation in the poincar ´e ball. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 28223–28232, 2024. 2, 3, 7 [57] Zhenzhen Weng, Mehmet Giray Ogut, Shai Limonchik, and Serena Yeung. Unsupervised discovery of the long-tail in instance segmentation using hierarchical self-supervision. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2603–2612, 2021. 3 [58] Ji-Jia Wu, Andy Chia-Hao Chang, Chieh-Yu Chuang, Chun-Pei Chen, Yu-Lun Liu, Min-Hung Chen, Hou-Ning Hu, Yung-Yu Chuang, and Yen-Yu Lin. Image-text co-decomposition for text-supervised semantic segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26794–26803, 2024. 1, 3 [59] Yongqin Xian, Subhabrata Choudhury, Yang He, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Semantic projection network for zero-and few-label semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8256–8265, 2019. 12 [60] Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:12077–12090, 2021. 1, 2, 5, 8 [61] Menglin Yang, Aosong Feng, Bo Xiong, Jihong Liu, Irwin King, and Rex Ying. Hyperbolic fine-tuning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04010 , 2024. 3 [62] Muyang Yi, Quan Cui, Hao Wu, Cheng Yang, Osamu Yoshie, and Hongtao Lu. A simple framework for text-supervised semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 7071–7080, 2023. 3 [63] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:5824–5836, 2020. 7 [64] Sukmin Yun, Seong Hyeon Park, Paul Hongsuck Seo, and Jinwoo Shin. Ifseg: Image-free semantic segmentation via vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 2967–2977, 2023. 1, 3 [65] Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Bolei Zhou, Sanja Fidler, and Anto-nio Torralba. Open vocabulary scene parsing. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 2002–2010, 2017. 3 [66] Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Semantic understand-ing of scenes through the ade20k dataset. International Journal of Computer Vision , 127(3):302–321, 2019. 5, 8, 10 

15 Derivative Computations for Various Functions 

Dot Product 

Given: • x = [ x1,x 2,...,x d]

• yi = [ yi1,y i2,...,y id ]

• fi = x·yi = Pdk=1 xkyik 

Derivative: 

∂f i

∂x j

= ∂∂x j

> d

X

> k=1

xkyik 

!

= yij 

Euclidean Distance 

Given: • x = [ x1,x 2,...,x d]

• yi = [ yi1,y i2,...,y id ]

• fi = ∥x−yi∥2 =

qPdj=1 (xj −yij )2

Let gi = ∥x−yi∥22 = Pdk=1 (xk −yik )2, so fi = √gi.Using chain rule: 

∂f i

∂x j

= 12 g−1/2 

> i

· ∂g i

∂x j

Compute ∂g i 

> ∂x j

:

∂g i

∂x j

= 2( xj −yij )

Thus:  ∂f i

∂x j

= 12 · 1

√gi

·2( xj −yij ) = xj −yij 

∥x−yi∥2

Cosine Similarity 

Given: • x = [ x1,x 2,...,x d]

• yi = [ yi1,y i2,...,y id ]

• fi = x·yi

> ∥x∥∥ yi∥

Let u = x·yi and v = ∥x∥:

∂f i

∂x j

= 1

∥yi∥ · ∂∂x j

 uv



Using quotient rule: 

∂∂x j

 uv



= 

> ∂u ∂x j

·v−u· ∂v ∂x j

v2

Compute partials: 

∂u ∂x j

= yij 

∂v ∂x j

= xj

∥x∥ = xj

v

Substitute: 

∂∂x j

 uv



= yij v−u· xj

> v

v2 = yij v2 −ux j

v3

Final result: 

∂f i

∂x j

= yij ∥x∥2 −(x·yi)xj

∥yi∥∥ x∥3

16 Normalized Vectors Case 

If ∥x∥ = 1 and ∥yi∥ = 1 , then: 

fi = x·yi =

> d

X

> k=1

xkyik 

∂f i

∂x j

= yij 

## Hyperbolic operations 

Hyperbolic Cosine with Lorentz Product 

Given: • x = [ x1,x 2,...,x d]

• yi = [ yi1,y i2,...,y id ]

• Lorentz product: ⟨x,yi⟩L = −x0yi0 +Pdj=1 xj yij 

• x0 = p1+ ∥x∥2, yi0 = p1+ ∥yi∥2

• f di = cosh −1(−⟨ x,yi⟩L)

Let u = −⟨ x,yi⟩L = x0yi0 −Pdj=1 xj yij 

Then: 

fi = cosh −1(u)

Using the chain rule: 

∂f di

∂x j

= 1

√u2 −1 · ∂u ∂x j

Compute ∂u ∂x j :

∂u ∂x j

= yi0 · ∂x 0

∂x j

−yij 

Since ∂x 0 

> ∂x j

= xj 

> x0

:

∂u ∂x j

= yi0 · xj

x0

−yij 

Final result: 

∂f di

∂x j

=

−(yij − yi0

x0

xj )

s

x0yi0 − dP

> k=1

xkyik 

2

−1

Arccosine with Lorentz Product 

Given: • f ai = arccos 

 x0+yi0⟨x,yi⟩L

> ∥yi∥

√⟨x,yi⟩2

> L−1



Let: 

L = ⟨x,yi⟩L

N = x0 +yi0LD = pL2 −1

A = N

∥yi∥D

Then: 

f ai = arccos( A)

Using the chain rule: 

∂f ai

∂x j

= − 1

√1−A2 · ∂A ∂x j

17 Compute ∂A ∂x j :

∂A ∂x j

= 1

∥yi∥ · ∂∂x j

 ND



Using the quotient rule: 

∂∂x j

 ND



= D· ∂N ∂x j −N · ∂D ∂x j

D2

Since D2 = L2 −1 and ∂D ∂x j = LD∂L ∂x j :

∂A ∂x j

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1

 ∂N ∂x j

− N L L2 −1

∂L ∂x j



Compute partials: 

∂L ∂x j

= yij − yi0xj

x0

∂N ∂x j

= xj

x0

+yi0



yij − yi0xj

x0



= yi0yij − ∥yi∥2xj

x0

Substitute (formulation 1): 

∂A ∂x j

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1



yij 



yi0 − N L L2 −1



+ xj

x0



−∥ yi∥2 + N Ly i0

L2 −1

 

Final result:  ∂f ai

∂x j

= − 1

√1−A2 · 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1



yij 



yi0 − N L L2 −1



+ xj

x0



−∥ yi∥2 + N Ly i0

L2 −1

 

Substitute (formulation 2): 

∂A ∂x j

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1

 xj

x0

+yi0



yij − yi0xj

x0



− N L L2 −1



yij − yi0xj

x0

 

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1

 xj

x0

+



yi0 − N L L2 −1

 

yij − yi0xj

x0

 

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1

 xj

x0

+

 yi0(L2 −1) −(x0 +yi0L)LL2 −1

 

yij − yi0xj

x0

 

= 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1

 xj

x0

−

 yi0 +x0LL2 −1

 

yij − yi0xj

x0

 

Final result:  ∂f ai

∂x j

= 1

√1−A2 · 1

∥yi∥√L2 −1



− xj

x0

+

 yi0 +x0LL2 −1

 

yij − yi0xj

x0

 

Angle Between ∇f d and ∇f a

Here, ∇f ∗ = [ ∂f ∗ 

> ∂x j

]. We simplify notation by replacing the yi and fi with y and fi. The dot product ( ∇f d · (∇f a)T ) sign depends only on the sign of the following term, as the multiplicative terms are positive. 

∇f d ·(∇f a)T =X

> j



−(yj − y0

x0

xj )( − xj

x0

+

 y0 +x0LL2 −1

 

yj − y0xj

x0



)



= −X

> j

" y0 +x0LL2 −1

 

yj − y0xj

x0

2

−(yj − y0

x0

xj )( xj

x0

)

#

= −

 y0 +x0L

(L2 −1) x20

X

> j

(yj x0 −y0xj )2 −(L2 −1) 

;derived later 

Close inspection of the first term 

 y0 +x0L

(L2 −1) x20

X

> j

(yj x0 −y0xj )2

Close inspection of the second term 

18 X

> j

[( yj − y0

x0

xj )( xj

x0

)] = 1

x20

(x0

X

> j

xj yj −y0

X

> k

x2 

> j

)= 1

x20

(x0(L+x0y0)−y0(x20 −1)); Lorentz Dot product and Lorentz points 

= x0L+y0

x20

X

> j

(yj x0 −y0xj )2 −(L2 −1) = X

> j

(y2 

> j

x20 −2x0y0xj yj +y20 x2 

> j

)−(( −x0y0 +X

> k

xkyk)2 −1) = x20

X

> j

y2 

> j

−2x0y0

X

> j

(xj yj )+ y20

X

> j

x2 

> j

−(x20y20 −2x0y0

X

> k

(xkyk)+( X

> k

xkyk)2 −1) = x20

X

> j

y2 

> j

+y20

X

> j

x2 

> j

−x20y20 −(X

> k

xkyk)2 +1 = (1+ X

> j

x2 

> j

)X

> j

y2 

> j

+(1+ X

> j

y2 

> j

)X

> j

x2 

> j

−(1+ X

> j

x2 

> j

)(1+ X

> j

y2 

> j

)−(X

> k

xkyk)2 +1; with −x20 +Xx2 

> j

= −1= X

> j

x2

> j

X

> j

y2 

> j

−(X

> j

xj yj )2;remaining terms 

≥ 0( N on −N egativevalues ); Cauchy Inequality 

> 0( non identical vectors )

Finally, the sign of 

sign (∇f d ·(∇f a)T ) = sign (−

 y0 +x0L

(L2 −1) x20

X

> j

(yj x0 −y0xj )2 −(L2 −1) 

)= sign (( −x0L)−y0); x0 > 0,y 0 > 0,L ≤ − 1( curvature of -1 )

For uncertain points, less gradient!! x0 > y 0 implies (−x0L) > y 0. When sign (( −x0L) − y0) is +ve , it implies gradient synergy for the two loss components and faster convergence. 

Hyperbolic Coordinate Transformation 

Given: • v = [ v1,v 2,...,v k] is a vector • |v| =

qPkl=1 v2 

> l

is the Euclidean norm • x0 = cosh( |v|)

• For j = 1 ,...,k : xj = sinh( |v|)· vj

> |v|

We want to compute ∂x j 

> ∂v l

for j = 0 ,1,...,k and l = 1 ,...,k .

Derivative of x0 with respect to vl

x0 = cosh( |v|)

Using the chain rule: 

∂x 0

∂v l

= sinh( |v|)· ∂|v|

∂v l

We know: 

∂|v|

∂v l

= vl

|v|

19 Therefore:  ∂x 0

∂v l

= sinh( |v|)· vl

|v|

Derivative of xj with respect to vl for j = 1 ,...,k 

xj = sinh( |v|)· vj

|v|

Let u = sinh( |v|) and w = vj 

> |v|

, so xj = u·w.Using the product rule: 

∂x j

∂v l

= ∂u ∂v l

·w+u· ∂w ∂v l

Compute ∂u ∂v l :

∂u ∂v l

= cosh( |v|)· ∂|v|

∂v l

= cosh( |v|)· vl

|v|

Compute ∂w ∂v l :

w = vj

|v|

Using the quotient rule: 

∂w ∂v l

= 

> ∂v j
> ∂v l

·| v|− vj · ∂|v|

> ∂v l

|v|2

We have: • ∂v j 

> ∂v l

= δjl (Kronecker delta: 1 if j = l, 0 otherwise) • ∂|v| 

> ∂v l

= vl

> |v|

So: 

∂w ∂v l

= δjl ·| v|− vj · vl

> |v|

|v|2 = δjl 

|v| − vj vl

|v|3

Combine all terms:  ∂x j

∂v l

=



cosh( |v|)· vl

|v|



· vj

|v| +sinh( |v|)·

 δjl 

|v| − vj vl

|v|3



= vj vl

|v|2 cosh( |v|)+ δjl 

|v| sinh( |v|)− vj vl

|v|3 sinh( |v|)

Factor terms:  ∂x j

∂v l

= δjl 

|v| sinh( |v|)+ vj vl

|v|2



cosh( |v|)− sinh( |v|)

|v|



Final Results 

∂x 0

∂v l

= vl

|v| sinh( |v|)

∂x j

∂v l

= δjl 

|v| sinh( |v|)+ vj vl

|v|2



cosh( |v|)− sinh( |v|)

|v|



for j = 1 ,...,k and l = 1 ,...,k .

Claim. For r > 0,

cosh( r)− sinh( r)

r > 0.

Proof. Define 

g(r) = rcosh( r)−sinh( r).

Then 

g′(r) = rsinh( r) > 0 for r > 0,

so g is strictly increasing. Since lim r→0g(r) = 0 , we have g(r) > 0 for all r > 0. Dividing by r > 0 gives the result. 20 Numerical check. Using Taylor expansions, 

cosh( r) = 1+ r2

2 +O(r4), sinh( r) = r+ r3

6 +O(r5),

so 

cosh( r)− sinh( r)

r = r2

3 +O(r4) > 0 for small r > 0.

□

21