Title: CreatiParser: Generative Image Parsing of Raster Graphic Designs into Editable Layers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.19632v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 01:28:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> 1

# CreatiParser: Generative Image Parsing of Raster Graphic Designs into Editable Layers 

Weidong Chen, Member, IEEE , Dexiang Hong, Zhendong Mao, Member, IEEE ,Yutao Cheng, Xinyan Liu, Lei Zhang, Yongdong Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Graphic design images consist of multiple editable layers, such as text, background, and decorative elements, while most generative models produce rasterized outputs without explicit layer structures, limiting downstream editing. Existing graphic design parsing methods typically rely on multi-stage pipelines combining layout prediction, matting, and inpainting, which suffer from error accumulation and limited controllability. We propose a hybrid generative framework for raster-to-layer graphic design parsing that decomposes a design image into editable text, background, and sticker layers. Text regions are parsed using a vision-language model into a text rendering protocol, enabling faithful reconstruction and flexible re-editing, while background and sticker layers are generated using a multi-branch diffusion architecture with RGBA support. We further introduce ParserReward and integrate it with Group Relative Policy Optimization to align generation quality with human design preferences. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets, i.e., the Parser-40K and Crello datasets, demonstrate superior performance over existing methods, eg., achieving an overall average improvement of 23.7% across all metrics. 

Index Terms —Graphic Design, Diffusion Model, Large Lan-guage Model, Reinforcement Learning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Graphic design serves as an indispensable medium for vi-sual communication across industries—from advertising (bill-boards, social media creatives) to UI/UX design (app in-terfaces, web banners). A defining characteristic of graphic design is its layered composition, typically comprising text, stickers, and backgrounds. The existence of editable layers allows designers to flexibly adjust individual components: for instance, updating promotional text on a poster without altering the background texture, or resizing a product image in a banner while maintaining overall color harmony and layout consistency. However, the rapid proliferation of AI-generated raster designs, produced by advanced generative models [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], has created a pressing demand 

This research is supported by Artificial Intelligence-National Science and Technology Major Project 2023ZD0121200, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302474 and 62502115. Corresponding author: Zhendong Mao. Weidong Chen, Dexiang Hong, and Lei Zhang are with the School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China (e-mail: chenweidong@ustc.edu.cn; hongdex-iang@mail.ustc.edu.cn; leizh23@ustc.edu.cn). Yutao Cheng is with the ByteDance Intelligent Creation, Shanghai, China (e-mail: taorebobi@gmail.com). Xinyan Liu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Weihai), Weihai, China (e-mail: xinyliu@hit.edu.cn). Yongdong Zhang and Zhendong Mao, are with the School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, and are also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei 230027, China (e-mail: zhyd73@ustc.edu.cn; zdmao@ustc.edu.cn). 

Fig. 1: Illustration of graphic design image parsing. Given a rasterized design image, our task aims to decompose it into three editable layers: Text , Sticker , and Background .for “raster-to-layer” parsing. These AI outputs are pixel-based and non-editable, making them unsuitable for post-generation customization. Consequently, designers often have to rely on manual editing tools (e.g., Photoshop, Adobe Firefly) to separate and reconstruct layers, a process that is both time-consuming and error-prone. Recent advances in image parsing have attempted to au-tomate this decomposition, and existing methods can be broadly divided into two categories. The first category, which dominates the current landscape, leverages multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to parse an image into a draft protocol—a structured intermediate representation specifying the spatial locations of key elements and textual attributes in a predefined format [7], [8], [9]. Based on this protocol, a cascaded pipeline of first matting and then image inpainting is employed to separate detected elements and reconstruct the background. However, these multi-step modularized systems are prone to error accumulation: inaccuracies in layout parsing propagate to matting, and the uncontrollable behavior of inpainting models [10], [11] often introduces visual artifacts or stylistic inconsistencies, yielding results that deviate from the original design semantics. The second category of meth-ods utilizes generative models for parsing. Prior studies in generative direction, however, have been largely restricted to natural image decomposition, focusing on foreground-background separation [12], [13], [14]. Such a binary paradigm is ill-suited for graphic design, where compositions comprise semantically heterogeneous elements—such as backgrounds, foreground subjects, and text overlays—serving distinct func-tions. Collapsing them into a coarse dichotomy forces the model to conflate fundamentally different components, yield-ing semantically ambiguous layers with limited editability. In this work, we propose a hybrid generative framework for 

> arXiv:2604.19632v1 [cs.CV] 21 Apr 2026 2

raster-to-layer graphic design parsing that explicitly models the heterogeneous nature of design elements. Instead of relying on a single generative paradigm, we decompose the problem into text and non-text components. Text regions are parsed using a Vision Language Model, which converts rasterized text into a text rendering protocol, enabling faithful reconstruction and flexible re-editing regardless of font availability or artistic styles. For non-textual content, we design a multi-branch diffusion architecture that jointly generates background and sticker layers—i.e., decorative non-text foreground elements such as lines, shapes, and icons—with explicit support for transparent RGBA outputs.To further align text parsing with human design preferences, we introduce ParserReward, a task-specific evaluation objective that captures semantic fidelity, layer disentanglement, and editability. We integrate Parser-Reward into a Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) framework to optimize Qwen3-VL text rendering protocol prediction in a stable and parameter-efficient manner. Exten-sive experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate that our approach consistently outperforms existing methods in terms of layer reconstruction accuracy, text editability, and percep-tual quality. Notably, the proposed framework generalizes well to the Crello dataset in a zero-shot setting, highlighting its robustness to unseen design styles and layouts. To sum up, our contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows: - We propose a hybrid generative framework for raster-to-layer graphic design image parsing, which decomposes a rasterized design image into text layer, background layer, and sticker layer, overcoming the limitations of multi-stage pipeline-based existing methods. - We introduce a VLM-based text parsing module to predict the text layer, together with a multi-branch diffusion archi-tecture for background and sticker layer generation, enabling faithful reconstruction and flexible editing. - We propose Parser Reward and integrate it with Group Relative Policy Optimization to align Qwen3-VL text ren-dering protocol prediction with human design preferences, achieving superior text layer parsing performance. - We conduct extensive experiments on various graphic design benchmarks, and our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of layer reconstruction accuracy, text editability, and perceptual quality, demonstrating the effective-ness and generalizability of the proposed framework. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Image Decomposition 

In the early stage, image decomposition methods were dominated by optimization with geometric or physical priors in color space [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. These methods produce interpretable layer extraction, but their dependence on handcrafted assumptions limits robustness and scalability to high-level semantic layers. Recent data-driven methods move toward modular parsing pipelines. DreamLayer [12] builds synthetic layered data via matting, while MULAN [13] combines open-vocabulary detection [21], segmentation [22], depth estimation [23], and ordering heuristics [24] for layered decomposition in unconstrained scenes. Interactive matting approaches such as Click2Trimap [25] further reduce the annotation effort by learning trimaps from minimal user clicks. Although effective in natural images [14], most of such meth-ods focus on object-level foreground/background separation and cannot be directly transferred to graphic design, where typography, style effects, and structured layout are the core. Unlike natural images, in graphic design image decom-position, recent methods increasingly rely on MLLMs to first predict a draft protocol and then recover layers through VQGAN decoding or "first matting and then image inpainting" framework [7], [8], [26], [27], [9]. These design is flexible but vulnerable to stage-wise error accumulation: protocol errors propagate to image matting, and image inpainting [11] often introduces texture inconsistency or semantic drift. In addition, fused artistic typography and fine-grained editable attributes remain difficult to preserve in cascaded pipelines. Our method addresses these gaps with a hybrid formula-tion: VLM-based text rendering protocol prediction for ed-itable typography, and multi-branch diffusion generation for background/sticker layers with design-specific LoRA adapta-tion [28], [29]. The proposed method avoids a heavy depen-dence on cascaded post-processing while improving fidelity and editability in diverse design styles. 

B. Reinforcement Learning on Visual Language Models 

Reinforcement learning has become an important post-training paradigm for visual language models, especially for reducing hallucination and improving response reliabil-ity. Early studies adapted RLHF to multimodal settings by introducing image-grounded factual rewards and correction-oriented preference supervision [30], [31]. Subsequent work explored AI-generated feedback as a scalable alternative to human-only annotation, showing that trustworthiness can be improved with open-source feedback pipelines [32]. Recent multimodal alignment frameworks further expand this line from safety-centric correction to broader capability alignment under unified preference optimization objectives [33]. These efforts establish RL-based post-training as a practical comple-ment to supervised instruction tuning for VLM alignment. In parallel, R1-style training has shifted attention toward rule-based and verifiable rewards for perception-intensive reasoning tasks. Perception-R1 [34] and related grounded reasoning studies [35] show that rewards targeted at vi-sual evidence usage can improve grounding quality be-yond generic response-level preferences. For video under-standing, VideoChat-R1 [36] and Video-R1 [37] introduce reinforcement fine-tuning strategies that incorporate spatio-temporal constraints and temporal-aware policy updates. OpenThinkIMG [38] further explores tool-augmented RL for visual reasoning, emphasizing interaction-aware reward sig-nals instead of static text-only feedback. Different from these general-purpose VLM alignment settings, our method applies GRPO to text rendering protocol prediction in graphic de-sign parsing, where rewards are renderer-grounded and task-specific (pixel, layout, and semantic consistency) rather than open-ended conversational preference scores. 3

Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed CreatiParser framework. The framework comprises three components: (a) VLM-based Text Layer Parsing module (upper left), where a QwenLM-based multimodal decoder with LoRA generates text rendering protocols from the input graphic design, then with render engine to generate text layer; (b) Multi-branch Diffusion module (lower left), where three SDXL U-Net branches with Layer Token Attention (LTA) and LoRA adapters generate disentangled background and sticker layers; (c) GRPO Training (right), where the text parsing module is optimized via GRPO. Gradient backpropagation updates only the QwenLM LoRA weights while all other components remain frozen. III. M ETHOD 

A. Problem Formulation and Overview 

Given a rasterized graphic design image I, our goal is to de-compose it into a set of editable and semantically disentangled layers to make designers flexibly adjust each component: 

L = {Ltext , L sticker , L background }, (1) where Ltext , Lsticker , Lbackground correspond to the text layer, the sticker layer, and the background layer, respectively. Each layer is defined as follows: 

Text Layer Ltext : The editable layer that contains all typographic elements in the design. 

Sticker Layer Lsticker : An RGBA image representing all non-textual foreground elements, such as decorative lines, geometric shapes, icons, illustrative embellishments. 

Background Layer Lbackground : A full-resolution RGB im-age that carries the global visual context of the design, including base colors, textures, and photographic imagery. Graphic design parsing requires recovering both the editable text structure and the disentangled visual layers. To this end, we adopt a hybrid framework with three components: (1) A multi-branch diffusion model for background and sticker gen-eration; (2) A vision–language text parser based on Qwen3-VL for structured text prediction; and (3) A reward-guided optimization scheme for training the text parser. An overview of the framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. During inference, the input image is fed into the diffusion branch and the VLM branch in parallel. The diffusion branch predicts the sticker and background layers, while the VLM branch outputs a text rendering protocol, which is converted by a render engine into the text layer. The three outputs together form the final layered parsing result. 

B. Multi-Branch Diffusion for Background and Sticker Gen-eration 

As defined in Sec. 3.1, the background and sticker layers capture complementary non-textual content. The background layer provides a global visual canvas, while the sticker layer isolates localized decorative foreground elements. We model the generation of both layers using a diffusion-based gener-ative framework. Formally, given an input design image I,our objective is to jointly generate Lbackground (full-resolution RGB) and Lsticker (RGBA with explicit alpha channel). 

1) Multi-Branch Diffusion Architecture: Stable Diffusion has demonstrated strong generative priors for various image synthesis tasks [39], [40]. Thus, we adopt Stable Diffusion XL [41] as the backbone in this work, and construct a three-branch architecture to jointly model background and sticker generation. The three branches share the same U-Net topology but differ in their conditioning inputs: 

Condition branch : Receives the latent representation 

z(c) = E(I) of the clean input design image through the VAE encoder E, where knowledge is then passed to the Background/Sticker branches. 

Background branch : Receives noised latents z(b) 

> t

corre-sponding to the background layer at diffusion timestep t.

Sticker branch : Receives noised latents z(s) 

> t

corresponding to the sticker layer in RGBA space. Each branch follows the standard SDXL U-Net structure with independent self-attention and cross-attention modules. 4

To adapt the diffusion model to the graphic design domain efficiently, each branch is equipped with an independent Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) module. LoRA is applied to all at-tention projection matrices ( WQ, W K , W V , W O ) in the U-Net. All LoRA parameters are optimized during training, while the original SDXL weights remain frozen. This parameterization enables each branch to specialize in its target layer without degrading the pretrained generative prior. The sticker layer is generated as a transparent image with an explicit alpha channel. To support RGBA generation in latent space, following LayerDiffuse [42], we extend the SDXL VAE architecture to handle 4-channel inputs and generate transparent. The diffusion process operates in the latent RGBA space, allowing the model to jointly synthesize color and trans-parency. This design enables faithful generation of decorative elements with soft boundaries and partial transparency, which are common in real-world graphic design assets. 

2) Layer Token Attention Mechanism: To enable effec-tive information exchange across branches while maintaining layer-specific generation capacity, we introduce Layer Token Attention (LTA) at every U-Net block, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Let T(c) ∈ RNc×d, T(b) ∈ RNb×d, and T(s) ∈ RNs×d

denote the token embeddings produced by the condition, background, and sticker branches after their respective self-attention computation, where Nc, N b, N s are the token counts and d is the feature dimension. Since the three branches operate on the same spatial reso-lution, we have Nc = Nb = Ns = N . Instead of flattening all tokens jointly, LTA stacks branch features into a tensor 

Tstack = Stack (T(c), T(b), T(s)) ∈ R3×N ×d, (2) and applies self-attention along the branch dimension. For each spatial position n ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, we form 

Sn = [ T(c) 

> n

; T(b) 

> n

; T(s) 

> n

] ∈ R3×d, (3) 

ˆSn = MHA (SnWQ, SnWK , SnWV ), (4) where multi-head attention (MHA) is performed only among the three branch tokens at the same spatial location. Therefore, each token interacts only with its corresponding position in the other branches, rather than with all 3N tokens globally. The fused outputs are redistributed back to the three branches. For n = 1 , . . . , N , the formulation is: 

T(c)

> out ,n

, T(b)

> out ,n

, T(s) 

> out ,n

= Split (ˆSn), (5) These updated tokens are then combined with the original branch tokens via a learnable gating mechanism. 

˜T(k) = T(k) + σ(αk) · T(k) 

> out

, k ∈ { c, b, s }, (6) where αk is a learnable scalar, allowing gradual integration of cross-branch information during training. This design en-ables fine-grained interaction among the three branches while preserving spatial correspondence. 

C. VLM-based Text Layer Parsing via Text Rendering Proto-cols 

Text elements in graphic design images exhibit strong structural regularities, including explicit geometry, typography, 

Fig. 3: Illustration of Layer Token Attention (LTA). Tokens from the three branches are stacked into a 3 × N × d tensor, and self-attention is applied only along the branch dimension for each spatial location, enabling position-wise cross-branch information exchange. and rendering attributes. Instead of reconstructing text purely at the pixel level, we predict a text rendering protocol to preserve editability. 

1) Text Rendering Protocol: Given an input image I, we represent the text layer by a protocol 

Ptext = {c, {ℓi}Ni=1 }, (7) where c = (W, H ) denotes the canvas size, and each ℓi

corresponds to a single text instance. Each text instance ℓi is defined as 

ℓi = ( gi, s i, a i, r i), (8) where each element is a set that contains the following attributes: 

Geometric attributes gi: absolute position (x, y ), bounding box size (w, h ), orientation angle θ ∈ [0 , 2π), and bending parameters bi. For curved or warped text commonly found in graphic designs, we parameterize the text path using a cubic Bézier curve. The bending parameters bi are defined as: 

bi = {(p0, p 1, p 2, p 3), τ }, (9) where p0, p 1, p 2, p 3 ∈ R2 are the four control points of the Bézier curve, and τ ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether the text follows the curve ( τ = 1 ) or remains straight ( τ = 0 ). The curve is parameterized as: 

B(t) = (1 −t)3p0+3(1 −t)2tp 1+3(1 −t)t2p2+t3p3, t ∈ [0 , 1] .

(10) For straight text, we set τ = 0 and the bending parameters are ignored during rendering 

Semantic attributes si: Unicode text string and reading direction (left-to-right or right-to-left). 

Appearance attributes ai: font identifier fi, font size, text color (RGB or gradient specification), stroke width and color, 5

shadow configuration (color, offset angle, blur radius), line height, character spacing, and emphasis styles (italic, bold, underline). 

Relational attributes ri: alignment mode (left, center, right, justify) and z-order for layer stacking. 

2) Vision–Language Protocol Prediction: We employ apretrained vision–language model, Qwen3-VL [43], to infer the text rendering protocol directly from the input image: 

Ptext = FVL (I). (11) The model jointly reasons over visual layout and textual semantics, allowing it to recover fine-grained attributes such as font style, alignment, and decorative effects. We fine-tune Qwen3-VL by LoRA [28] on our self-collected Parser-40K dataset with paired (image, protocol) annotations. The output protocol follows a structured JSON schema. Then we use a render engine to convert the protocol to the text layer. 

D. ParserReward-Guided GRPO for Text Parsing 

To improve text accuracy and editability, we optimize the Qwen3-VL text parser with Group Relative Policy Optimiza-tion (GRPO). The reward evaluates whether the predicted protocol, after deterministic rendering, preserves the original text appearance, layout, and semantics. 

1) Parser Reward: Given the rendered text layer Ltext , we define three complementary reward terms: 

Rpix = exp 



− ∥Mtext ⊙ I − Ltext ∥1

∥Mtext ∥1 + ϵ



, (12) 

Rloc = IoU (Mtext , M ∗

> text

), (13) 

Rsem = Sim edit (Tprotocol , T ∗), (14) where Mtext and M ∗ 

> text

are the predicted and reference text masks, and Tprotocol and T ∗ are the predicted and reference text strings. We use normalized Levenshtein similarity Sim edit (a, b ) = 1 − Lev (a, b )max( |a|, |b|) , (15) and combine the three terms to get the total Reward Rtext .

Rtext = λpix Rpix + λloc Rloc + λsem Rsem , (16) 

2) GRPO Optimization: Given an input design image I,we sample K candidate text rendering protocols {P (k)}Kk=1 

from Qwen3-VL using temperature sampling ( τ = 0 .8). Each protocol is rendered into a text layer and scored by 

r(k) = Rtext (I, Render (P (k))) . (17) We then normalize rewards within each group: 

A(k) = r(k) − μr

σr + ϵ , (18) where μr = 1

> K

PKk=1 r(k) and σr =

q 1

> K

PKk=1 (r(k) − μr )2.The policy πθ (Qwen3-VL with LoRA adapters) is updated using 

LG = −E

> K

X

> k=1

min 



ρ(k)A(k), clip (ρ(k), 1 − ϵc, 1 + ϵc)A(k)

,

(19) 

Algorithm 1 ParserReward-guided GRPO for Qwen3-VL text parsing 

Require: Design images D; group size K = 16 ; learning rate 

η = 10 −4; total steps T = 2000  

> 1:

Initialize LoRA adapter parameters θ; freeze backbone ϕ 

> 2:

Initialize reference policy πref ← πθ 

> 3:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 4:

Sample mini-batch {Ii}Bi=1 ∼ D with B = 32  

> 5:

for each design image Ii do  

> 6:

Sample K protocols {P (k) 

> i

}Kk=1 from πθ (·| Ii) 

> 7:

for k = 1 to K do  

> 8:

Render text layer: L(k) 

> text

← Render (P (k) 

> i

) 

> 9:

Compute reward: r(k) 

> i

← Rtext (Ii, L (k) 

> text

) 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Compute advantages {A(k) 

> i

} via group normalization  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Compute LGRPO with clipped ratios  

> 14:

Add KL regularization: Ltotal ← L GRPO + β · DKL  

> 15:

Update: θ ← θ − η∇θ Ltotal  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

return Optimized adapter parameters θ

where ρ(k) = πθ (P (k)|I)   

> πθold (P(k)|I)

is the probability ratio, and ϵc = 0 .2

is the clipping threshold. To limit drift from the supervised initialization, we add a KL regularizer: 

Ltotal = LG + β · DKL (πθ ∥πref ), (20) where πref is the reference policy (initial fine-tuned model) and β = 0 .01 controls the regularization strength. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness, robustness, and generalization capability of the proposed framework for graphic design parsing. The exper-iments are designed to assess (i) layer decomposition accuracy, (ii) text editability and rendering fidelity, (iii) background and sticker generation quality, and (iv) cross-dataset generalization. 

A. Datasets 

We conduct experiments on two datasets covering both pro-fessionally designed graphics and AI-generated raster designs. 

1) Parser-40K Dataset: We construct the Parser-40K dataset, a large-scale graphic design dataset specifically cu-rated for this work. The images are collected from professional design platforms and licensed stock design libraries, with ex-plicit permission for research use, and each design is exported in PSD format, providing native layer decomposition. Since the source files already contain editable text objects and a complete layer structure, no additional manual annotation is required. We directly parse the layered design files and convert them into our unified three-layer representation: all layers of type sticker within a design are composited into a single sticker layer, while the original text metadata are converted into our text rendering protocol, and the remaining visual content forms the background supervision. 6

Fig. 4: From left to right column, we show: (a) the input poster image; (b) the reconstructed design by compositing the parsed layers; (c) the extracted background; (d) the extracted sticker layer; and (e) the extracted text layer. Our method accurately separates semantic layers, including text, decorative sticker elements, and background regions across diverse design styles, enabling clean layer extraction and faithful reconstruction. 

2) Crello Dataset: The Crello [44] dataset is a large-scale real-world design platform dataset featuring highly diverse templates, decorative elements, artistic typography, and com-plex visual compositions. Importantly, Crello data is not used during training. We directly apply our trained model to Crello in a zero-shot manner to evaluate its generalization ability across unseen styles and layouts. 

B. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate graphic design parsing using comprehensive metrics covering reconstruction accuracy, text editability, and perceptual quality. 

Layer Reconstruction Accuracy : We compute IoU be-tween predicted and ground-truth masks for text (T-IoU) and sticker (S-IoU) layers. 

Text Editability : Since our method predicts a structured text rendering protocol (Sec. III-C), we directly evaluate the accuracy of the predicted protocol fields against ground-truth annotations. Font Accuracy (Font) is reported separately, as font identification constitutes a high-cardinality discrete classification over hundreds of font families and is the primary determinant of text visual identity; it is evaluated by exact match between the predicted font identifier fi and the ground-truth label. Attribute Accuracy (Attr.) reports the mean per-field accuracy over the remaining appearance attributes ai

and relational attributes ri of the protocol. Discrete fields— emphasis styles (italic, bold, underline) and alignment mode (left, center, right, justify)—are evaluated by exact match. Continuous fields—font size, text color (RGB), stroke width and color, shadow configuration (offset angle, blur radius, color), line height, and character spacing—are judged correct if the predicted value falls within a threshold. 

Pixel-Level Reconstruction : We report RGB L1 error between the generated and ground-truth layers, computed separately for the text, sticker, and background layers, as well as the average across all layers. 

C. Implementation Details 

CreatiParser consists of two main components: a Qwen3-VL-based text parsing module and a diffusion-based back-ground and sticker generation module. The text parsing module is fine-tuned from Qwen3-VL-8b with LoRA using paired design images and text rendering 7

TABLE I: Comprehensive quantitative comparison on layer reconstruction, text editability, and perceptual quality. Results are reported on Parser-40K testset and Crello dataset (zero-shot). ↑: higher is better; ↓: lower is better. Best results in bold .                                                                              

> Dataset Method Layer IoU ↑Text Editability ↑RGB L1 ↓
> T-IoU S-IoU Font Attr Text Sticker BG Avg Parser-40K Baseline 0.712 0.438 ––0.0813 0.1034 0.0762 0.0870 LayerD 0.794 0.743 ––0.0472 0.0396 0.0615 0.0494 CreatiParser 0.873 0.854 0.824 0.891 0.0641 0.0278 0.0385 0.0435 CreatiParser-RL 0.896 0.862 0.873 0.912 0.0567 0.0271 0.0383 0.0407
> Crello Baseline 0.741 0.463 ––0.0736 0.0948 0.0685 0.0790 LayerD 0.822 0.764 ––0.0414 0.0337 0.0573 0.0441 CreatiParser 0.892 0.871 0.812 0.883 0.0635 0.0246 0.0364 0.0415 CreatiParser-RL 0.914 0.871 0.856 0.907 0.0618 0.0243 0.0361 0.0407

Fig. 5: Comparison of background layer generation quality by CreatiParser and LayerD. The leftmost images are the input image. The 2nd and 3rd columns are the decomposition results of the background layer. protocols. Training is performed with cross-entropy loss on both textual content and structural attributes. For background and sticker generation, we employ a three-branch SDXL backbone. Each branch is equipped with inde-pendent LoRA adapters to inject domain-specific knowledge while preserving pretrained priors. ParserReward-guided optimization is implemented using GRPO. For each training image, multiple candidate text ren-dering protocols are sampled from Qwen3-VL and evaluated by ParserReward, and the VLM policy is then refined through group-relative advantage estimation with clipped ratio updates. 

D. Comparison Methods 

We compare CreatiParser with baselines covering both traditional pipelines and recent generative approaches. 

Baseline : A conventional multi-stage pipeline combining semantic segmentation with image inpainting. We leverage the Grounded-SAM-2 [45] for text and sticker segmentation, and the LaMa [10] for background inpainting. All models leverage the official pre-trained weights. 

LayerD [9]: A matting-first approach followed by back-ground completion. We use the official code and pretrained weights released by the authors. 

Layer Category Normalization : The compared methods, 

i.e. , Baseline and LayerD, and the dataset, i.e., Crello, employ different layer taxonomies that cannot directly align with our three-category schema (text/sticker/background), thus necessi-tating a systematic normalization procedure for fair compari-son. We leverage GPT-4V [46] as an automatic layer classifier by providing it with each layer image, along with its spatial context within the full design, and a structured prompt that specifies our category definitions. To validate the reliability of this automatic classification, we randomly sampled 200 layers, 

i.e., 100 from baseline outputs and 100 from the Crello dataset, and obtained the ground-truth labels through independent annotation by two expert annotators with design backgrounds, achieving an inter-annotator agreement of Cohen’s κ = 0 .92 .A comparison of GPT-4V predictions against these consensus labels yields an overall classification accuracy of 94.5%, with per-category precision and recall of 96.2%/95.8% for text, 91.3%/90.7% for stickers, and 95.1%/96.4% for background layers, respectively. Error analysis reveals that misclassifi-cations primarily occur for heavily stylized decorative text elements that exhibit visual characteristics similar to those of stickers. Importantly, this normalization procedure is applied uniformly across all baseline methods and Crello samples, ensuring that any residual classification errors do not system-atically bias the comparative evaluation. 

E. Qualitative Results 

Fig. 4 visualizes our semantic-layer decomposition across diverse poster styles. From left to right, we show: (a) input, (b) reconstruction by recompositing parsed layers, (c) background, (d) sticker, and (e) text. Our method yields clean, well-separated layers: backgrounds retain global templates and color tones, stickers preserve sharp shapes, and text regions remain compact and legible. The close match between the reconstruction and the input indicates faithful decomposi-tion. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 further demonstrate robustness on photography-centric and illustration-based designs compared to the LayerD. Our results reduce common artifacts such as text leakage into backgrounds and confusion between stickers 8

Fig. 6: Visualization Comparison of full decomposition results between creatiparser and LayerD. TABLE II: Ablation study of key components on Parser-40K.                   

> Variant T-IoU ↑S-IoU ↑RGB L1 ↓
> w/o Qwen3-VL 0.715 0.453 0.0852 w/o ParserReward 0.873 0.854 0.0415 w/o LTA 0.896 0.433 0.1476 Full CreatiParser-RL 0.896 0.862 0.0407

and typography, enabling reliable downstream editing (e.g., text replacement, sticker removal, and background re-layout). 

F. Quantitative Results 

Table I reports comprehensive quantitative comparisons. Overall, CreatiParser consistently outperforms all baseline methods across all metrics and datasets. 

Layer reconstruction : CreatiParser improves both text and sticker IoU over all baselines. On Parser-40K, CreatiParser-RL reaches 0.896 T-IoU and 0.862 S-IoU, with the largest gain appearing on stickers, which reflects the benefit of RGBA-aware diffusion with explicit transparency modeling. RGB L1 results in Table I show the same trend. However, LayerD remains slightly better on text-layer L1, which we attribute to its use of a leading text segmentation model Hi-SAM for pixel-level extraction[9]. In contrast, our method predicts a structured text protocol, enabling editable font and attribute control beyond pixel-level decomposition. 

Text editability : Our VLM-based text parsing significantly outperforms image-based extraction methods. CreatiParser 

Fig. 7: Generalization comparison between CreatiParser and 

LayerD .

Fig. 8: Effect of GRPO group size K on performance. The dashed line denotes the baseline without GRPO ( K = 1 ). provides font identification (87.3%) and style attribute predic-tion (91.2%) that other methods cannot support. The GRPO optimization further improves all text metrics by 0.8–4.9%. 

Zero-shot generalization : On the Crello dataset, which is not seen during training, the proposed method CreatiParser maintains or even exceeds its Parser-40K performance, e.g., T-IoU 0.892 vs. 0.873 . As illustrated in Fig 7, we draw the two metrics between CreatiParser and LayerD. The value in the left figure is defined as seen metric - unseen metric , where the smaller the absolute value of the difference, the more stable the model’s generalization performance. We attribute this to the fact that the Crello dataset templates tend to have cleaner layouts and more standardized typography compared to the diverse and often noisy designs in Parser-40K, making them inherently easier to parse. This result demonstrates the strong generalization capability of the proposed framework CreatiParser to unseen design styles and layouts. 

G. Ablation Study 1) Component Ablation: As shown in Table II, the three modules exhibit a clear contribution hierarchy: VLM-based text parsing is the most critical, followed by LTA cross-branch interaction, while ParserReward provides a consistent but incremental refinement. 

VLM text parsing contributes the most to overall quality. Replacing it with a diffusion-only baseline causes a dramatic degradation across all metrics, i.e. , T-IoU drops from 0.896 

to 0.715 . This is expected—without an explicit text render-ing protocol, the model loses the ability to predict precise geometry and typography attributes, and must instead rely on pixel-level reconstruction alone, which demonstrates far less effectiveness for text editability. 

LTA presents an interesting asymmetry: removing it leaves visual disentanglement degrades severely—S-IoU falls to roughly half its original value and the L1 error increases by 3.6×. It confirms that cross-branch token exchange is 9

Fig. 9: Effect of LoRA rank in the multi-branch diffusion model on layer generation quality. Metrics are reported on the Parser-40K and Crello test sets. We rescale Sticker L1 by 

10 × to ensure it is on the same scale as S-IoU. 

Fig. 10: Effect of LoRA rank in Qwen3-VL on text parsing performance. Metrics are reported on Parser-40K and Crello test set specifically essential for background–sticker separation, even though it has no bearing on text parsing quality. 

ParserReward removal leads to modest but consistent drops across all metrics on the Parser-40K dataset. Rather than building foundational capability, ParserReward serves as a complementary refinement mechanism that sharpens the model on hard cases through reward-aligned policy updates. 

2) GRPO Group Size: Fig. 8 shows that scaling the group size from the single-sample baseline ( K=1 , i.e., no relative comparison) to moderate groups (K≥4) brings consistent gains on both tracked metrics, with performance peaking around K=16 . This aligns with the core intuition behind GRPO: a larger candidate pool yields more stable estimates of relative advantage, which in turn produces more reliable gradient signals for the structured protocol generation policy. Beyond K=16 , returns diminish while per-iteration training cost continues to grow roughly linearly, making K=16 the natural operating point that balances optimization quality against computational budget. 

3) Diffusion Branch LoRA Rank: Fig. 9 reveals that the diffusion branches saturate at a notably lower rank than the VLM adapter (rank 64 vs. 256). From rank 8 to 128, layer generation quality improves consistently across all metrics, with S-IoU gaining 8.7% and Sticker L1 error is decreas-ing substantially. Beyond rank 64, however, doubling the adapter parameters brings slight degradation rather than further gains, indicating mild overfitting when the adapter is over-parameterized relative to the available training signal. 

4) Qwen3-VL LoRA Rank Ablation: As shown in Fig 10, text parsing quality improves steadily as the LoRA rank scales from 32 to 256, with T-IoU rising from 0.856 to 0.896 and TABLE III: Effect of reward weights ( λpix : λloc : λsem ). 

Weight ratio Text L1 ↓ T-IoU ↑

2:1:1 0.068 0.889 1:2:1 0.065 0.892 1:1:2 0.068 0.884 0:1:1 0.078 0.891 1:1:1 (Ours) 0.056 0.896 

Font accuracy gaining over eight percentage points. This trend is intuitive: the VLM must predict a richly structured output space encompassing precise geometry, typography, and style attributes, and higher-rank adapters provide the additional capacity needed to capture these fine-grained variations while keeping the backbone frozen. However, further doubling the rank to 512 brings no additional benefit—all metrics slightly degrade despite a 2× increase in adapter parameters, indicating the onset of overfitting. We therefore select rank 256 as the best performance–efficiency operating point. 

5) Reward Weight Ablation: As shown in Table III, the equal weighting configuration (1:1:1) achieves the best over-all balance across all metrics. Over-emphasizing any single reward term leads to predictable trade-offs: boosting the pixel-level weight mildly hurts text localization accuracy, while an aggressive semantic weight causes a more pronounced degra-dation in layout fidelity. The most informative comparison comes from completely removing the pixel term (0:1:1), which results in the largest reconstruction penalty (Text L1 rises to 

0.078 ). This demonstrates that semantic and localization re-wards alone cannot preserve rendering-level consistency—the pixel-level signal provides an indispensable low-level anchor that the other two objectives cannot substitute. These results support a balanced reward design rather than aggressively optimizing any single objective. V. C ONCLUSION 

We presented CreatiParser, a generative framework for graphic design parsing that decomposes rasterized design images into editable text, background, and sticker layers. Our hybrid approach combines VLM-based structured text parsing with multi-branch diffusion generation, enabling faithful re-construction and flexible editing. The proposed ParserReward and GRPO optimization align text rendering protocol predic-tion with human design preferences. Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on both in-domain (Parser-40K) and zero-shot (Crello) evaluations, with compre-hensive ablations validating each design choice. REFERENCES [1] T. Seedream, Y. Chen, Y. Gao, L. Gong, M. Guo, Q. Guo, Z. Guo, X. Hou, W. Huang, Y. Huang et al. , “Seedream 4.0: To-ward next-generation multimodal image generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20427 , 2025. [2] H. Cai, S. Cao, R. Du, P. Gao, S. Hoi, S. Huang, Z. Hou, D. Jiang, X. Jin, L. Li et al. , “Z-image: An efficient image generation foun-dation model with single-stream diffusion transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22699 , 2025. [3] M. Xu, J. Wang, M. Tao, B.-K. Bao, and C. Xu, “Cookgalip: Recipe con-trollable generative adversarial clips with sequential ingredient prompts for food image generation,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 2024. 10 

[4] X. Jiang, Y. Li, F. Yan, Y. Lu, C. Xu, and M. Xu, “Mgdefect: A mask-guided high-quality defect image generation method for improving defect inspection,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 2025. [5] B. Yuan, Y. Sheng, B.-K. Bao, Y.-P. P. Chen, and C. Xu, “Semantic distance adversarial learning for text-to-image synthesis,” IEEE Trans-actions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 1255–1266, 2023. [6] S. Pan, Z. Zhang, K. Wei, X. Yang, and C. Deng, “Few-shot genera-tive model adaptation via style-guided prompt,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 7661–7672, 2024. [7] H. Nie, Z. Zhang, Y. Cheng, M. Yang, G. Shi, Q. Xie, J. Shao, and X. Wu, “Decomposition of graphic design with unified multimodal model,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. [8] J. Chen, Z. Wang, N. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Yang, and Q. Chen, “Re-thinking layered graphic design generation with a top-down approach,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025, pp. 16 861–16 870. [9] T. Suzuki, K.-J. Liu, N. Inoue, and K. Yamaguchi, “Layerd: Decompos-ing raster graphic designs into layers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025, pp. 17 783–17 792. [10] R. Suvorov, E. Logacheva et al. , “Resolution-robust large mask inpaint-ing with fourier convolutions,” in WACV , 2022. [11] Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, R. Hu, Q. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Mutual dual-task generator with adaptive attention fusion for image inpainting,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 1539–1550, 2023. [12] J. Huang, P. Yan, J. Cai, J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Wu, and G. Li, “Dreamlayer: Simultaneous multi-layer generation via diffusion model,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025. [13] P.-D. Tudosiu, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, F. Chen, S. McDonagh, G. Lampouras, I. Iacobacci, and S. Parisot, “Mulan: A multi layer annotated dataset for controllable text-to-image generation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 22 413–22 422. [14] J. Yang, Q. Liu, Y. Li, S. Y. Kim, D. Pakhomov, M. Ren, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, C. Xie, and Y. Zhou, “Generative image layer decomposition with visual effects,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. [15] J. Tan, J.-M. Lien, and Y. Gingold, “Decomposing images into layers via rgb-space geometry,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 36, no. 1, 2016. [16] J. Tan, J. Echevarria, and Y. Gingold, “Efficient palette-based decom-position and recoloring of images via rgbxy-space geometry,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 37, no. 6, 2018. [17] Y. Aksoy, T. O. Aydin, A. Smoli´ c, and M. Pollefeys, “Unmixing-based soft color segmentation for image manipulation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 36, no. 2, 2017. [18] N. Akimoto, H. Zhu, Y. Jin, and Y. Aoki, “Fast soft color segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. [19] Y. Koyama and M. Goto, “Decomposing images into layers with advanced color blending,” Computer Graphics Forum , vol. 37, no. 7, 2018. [20] D. Horita, K. Aizawa, R. Suzuki, T. Yonetsuji, and H. Zhu, “Fast nonlinear image unblending,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 2022. [21] L. Yao, J. Han, X. Liang, D. Xu, W. Zhang, Z. Li, and H. Xu, “Detclipv2: Scalable open-vocabulary object detection pre-training via word-region alignment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023. [22] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al. , “Segment anything,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. [23] R. Ranftl, K. Lasinger, D. Hafner, K. Schindler, and V. Koltun, “Towards robust monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 44, no. 3, 2022. [24] H. Lee and J. Park, “Instance-wise occlusion and depth orders in natural scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022. [25] C. Zhang, Y. Hu, H. Ding, H. Shi, Y. Zhao, and Y. Wei, “Learning trimaps via clicks for image matting,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,2025. [26] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural discrete representation learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017. [27] P. Esser, R. Rombach, and B. Ommer, “Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2021, pp. 12 873– 12 883. [28] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen et al. , “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.” 

ICLR , vol. 1, no. 2, p. 3, 2022. [29] N. Ding, Y. Qin, G. Yang, F. Wei, Z. Yang, Y. Su, S. Hu, Y. Chen, C.-M. Chan, W. Chen et al. , “Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large-scale pre-trained language models,” Nature machine intelligence , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 220–235, 2023. [30] Z. Sun, S. Shen, S. Cao, H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Shen, C. Gan, L.-Y. Gui, Y.-X. Wang, Y. Yang, K. Keutzer, and T. Darrell, “Aligning large multimodal models with factually augmented RLHF,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , 2024, pp. 13 088–13 110. [31] T. Yu, Y. Yao, H. Zhang, T. He, Y. Han, G. Cui, J. Hu, Z. Liu, H.-T. Zheng, M. Sun, and T.-S. Chua, “Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment from fine-grained correctional human feedback,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 13 807–13 816. [32] T. Yu, H. Zhang, Q. Li, Q. Xu, Y. Yao, D. Chen, X. Lu, G. Cui, Y. Dang, T. He, X. Feng, J. Song, B. Zheng, Z. Liu, T.-S. Chua, and M. Sun, “Rlaif-v: Open-source ai feedback leads to super gpt-4v trustworthiness,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025, pp. 19 985–19 995. [33] Y.-F. Zhang, T. Yu, H. Tian, C. Fu, P. Li, J. Zeng, W. Xie, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, J. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, B. Wen, F. Yang, Z. Zhang, T. Gao, D. Zhang, L. Wang, R. Jin, and T. Tan, “Mm-rlhf: The next step forward in multimodal LLM alignment,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 267, 2025. [34] E. Yu, K. Lin, L. Zhao, J. Yin, Y. Wei, Y. Peng, H. Wei, J. Sun, C. Han, Z. Ge, X. Zhang, D. Jiang, J. Wang, and W. Tao, “Perception-r1: Pioneer-ing perception policy with reinforcement learning,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [35] M. Cao, H. Zhao, C. Zhang, X. Chang, I. Reid, and X. Liang, “Ground-r1: Incentivizing grounded visual reasoning via reinforcement learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20272 , 2026. [36] X. Li, Z. Yan, D. Meng, L. Dong, X. Zeng, Y. He, Y. Wang, Y. Qiao, Y. Wang, and L. Wang, “Videochat-r1: Enhancing spatio-temporal perception via reinforcement fine-tuning,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [37] K. Feng, K. Gong, B. Li, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, T. Peng, J. Wu, X. Zhang, B. Wang, and X. Yue, “Video-r1: Reinforcing video reasoning in mllms,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=a2JTVVvcEl [38] Z. Su, L. Li, M. Song, Y. Hao, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, G. Chen, J. Gu, J. Li, X. Qu, and Y. Cheng, “Openthinkimg: Learning to think with images via visual tool reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08617 ,2025. [39] Y. Jiang, Q. Liu, D. Chen, L. Yuan, and Y. Fu, “Animediff: Customized image generation of anime characters using diffusion model,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 10 559–10 572, 2024. [40] Y. Xu, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “Sgdm: An adaptive style-guided diffusion model for personalized text to image generation,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 9804–9813, 2024. [41] D. Podell, Z. English, K. Lacey, A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, J. Müller, J. Penna, and R. Rombach, “Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [42] L. Zhang and M. Agrawala, “Transparent image layer diffusion using latent transparency,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2024. [43] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv et al. , “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [44] K. Yamaguchi, “Canvasvae: Learning to generate vector graphic docu-ments,” ICCV , 2021. [45] T. Ren, S. Liu, A. Zeng, J. Lin, K. Li, H. Cao, J. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Chen, F. Yan et al. , “Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 , 2024. [46] OpenAI, “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 ,2023.