Title: FiCA: Feed-forward instant Gaussian Codec Avatars from a Single Portrait Image

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24232v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:42:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# FiCA: Feed-forward Instant Gaussian Codec Avatars from a Single Portrait Image 

# Kim Youwang 1,2∗ Zhengyu Yang 1 Liuhao Ge 1 Yu Rong 1 Timur Bagautdinov 1 Su Zhaoen 1

# Nir Sopher 1 Jovan Popovi´ c1 Teng Deng 1 Tae-Hyun Oh 2,3 Chen Cao 1

> 1

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta 2Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH 3School of Computing, KAIST 

https://kim-youwang.github.io/FiCA 

Figure 1. Feed-forward instant Gaussian Codec Avatars (FiCA). Our method creates drivable, photorealistic 3D Gaussian head avatars from a casually captured, single portrait image, within 5 seconds . The generated head avatars can be animated consistently across different identities in real-time, given target expressions. Please refer to the supplementary video for dynamic avatar animation results. 

# Abstract 

We introduce FiCA , a Feed-forward, instant Gaussian Codec 

Avatar generation pipeline that creates lifelike avatars from a single portrait image. Generating a photorealistic and drivable avatar from just a single image is significantly chal-lenging due to the limited visual information available to accurately infer the 3D appearance and geometry of hu-man heads. To address this, we develop a novel system that combines human-centric vision foundation models with a diffusion model. This system is designed to fully exploit par-tial visual observations to generate lifelike human avatars. Our proposed diffusion model learns a generative mapping from these partial observations to complete and authentic 3D mesh reconstruction. Additionally, we introduce a feed-forward mesh refinement network that enhances the fidelity and identity preservation of the generated avatars, eliminat-ing the need for person-specific test-time optimization. By leveraging a universal prior model that decodes a generated mesh into a set of 3D Gaussians, we generate a photore-

> ∗Work done while Youwang was an intern at Codec Avatars Lab, Meta.

alistic 3D Gaussian avatar, capable of being driven with novel expressions in real-time. Our experiments demonstrate that the avatars generated by our feed-forward approach faithfully represent diverse identities and surpass the visual quality of avatars produced by recent competing methods. 

# 1. Introduction 

Photorealistic human avatars serve as the foundation for enabling immersive telepresence in virtual and augmented reality [ 40 , 41 , 45 ]. An authentic 3D human avatar that can be represented, recognized, and animated as self can signifi-cantly enhance user experience and engagement. Recent ad-vances in the computer vision and graphics field [ 31 , 46 , 59 ]have unblocked the creation of highly realistic avatars. Still, creating such highly realistic and drivable 3D avatars typi-cally requires a cumbersome and time-consuming capture pipeline, which limits the democratization of such promising technologies in reality. The core challenge of contemporary avatar creation pipelines is the trade-off between the abundance of ob-1

> arXiv:2606.24232v1 [cs.CV] 23 Jun 2026

servation and the computation burden during the capture setup. Typically, dense visual observations from accu-rately calibrated multi-view human performance capture systems [ 28 , 29 , 33 , 40 , 66 , 69 ] help achieve high-fidelity 3D/4D avatar reconstruction results while requiring sig-nificant computational resources and complex processing pipelines. On the other hand, using accessible capture meth-ods, e.g ., monocular phone capture or profile images, can streamline the capture process but require strong prior knowl-edge to compensate for the lack of visual evidence. Recently, a line of work [ 8 , 36 ] tried to streamline exist-ing avatar creation pipelines using more casual user inputs, 

e.g ., monocular video captures. These methods introduced the universal prior model (UPM) that covers the universal corpus of human appearances and geometries. The UPM gets a canonical 3D mesh representing the target identity, and decodes it into a highly detailed, real-time drivable avatar, often represented in a set of volumetric primitives [ 41 ] or 3D Gaussians [ 31 ]. While these methods obtained remarkable avatar quality and relaxed the user-side requirements, a cum-bersome test-time UPM fine-tuning stages are mandatory to balance the evidence-prior trade-offs [ 8]. Moreover, offline 3D head tracking is also required to get reliable conditioning data for the prior models [ 8, 36 ]. Despite the promising quality of the created avatars, these requirements still limit the accessibility of avatar creation to novice users. To address these limitations, we propose FiCA , a Feed-forward, instant Gaussian Codec Avatar creation pipeline. FiCA takes a casually captured, single portrait image as an input and generates an authentic head avatar, represented in a set of 3D Gaussian primitives that can be driven in real-time with arbitrary head pose and expression parameters. The core of our system is a module-based, feed-forward design that seamlessly connects human-centric vision foun-dation models, a generative model, and a feed-forward refine-ment model. Given a single portrait image, we obtain partial and incomplete visual observations, such as RGB face tex-ture, normal, UV and vertex coordinates, by leveraging tai-lored human-centric vision foundation models [ 32 ]. We then perform a diffusion-based generative mapping that converts the partial information into a complete and realistic human avatar, represented as a canonical textured mesh. With such a cascaded design, we make the most of the visual observation one can get from the pixel space and leverage the generative prior learned from the dataset of high-quality human avatar assets. Furthermore, we introduce a feed-forward mesh re-finement network to enhance the image-space alignment of the generated avatar. We found the proposed feed-forward mesh refinement network to be essential in achieving real-istic and authentic avatars, as it corrects the subtle details such as skin tone and cloth details, which are crucial for the avatar’s authenticity. Finally, the subsequent universal prior model [ 8 , 36 ] decodes the generated canonical meshes into real-time drivable 3D Gaussian avatars. Overall, FiCA gen-erates an authentic Codec Avatar from a single image in 5seconds in a truly feed-forward manner (Fig. 1). We evaluate the quality of FiCA-generated avatars with unseen, diverse identities and expressions and show that our approach outperforms recent single-image-based avatar gen-eration methods by a large margin visually and quantitatively. We also investigate the effects of the core design choices. We summarize our main contributions as follows: • We propose FiCA, a feed-forward system for creating au-thentic human avatars from a single casual portrait image. • We design a diffusion model that generates complete avatar texture and geometry, conditioned on partial observations. • We introduce a feed-forward mesh refinement module, which enhances the fidelity of avatars without involving a person-specific test-time optimization process. 

# 2. Related Work 

We aim to build a feed-forward system for creating an authen-tic facial avatar from a single portrait image with generative modeling. We briefly review these lines of work. 

Avatar Generation from Monocular Imagery. Creating life-like 3D facial avatars from monocular images or videos is a highly ill-posed problem. Existing methods typically formulate this task as an optimization problem with domain-specific priors to compensate for the missing information from single-view imagery. Within this paradigm, monocular avatar generation methods can be categorized into video-based and image-based approaches. The video-based approaches [ 2, 5, 8, 18 , 22 – 24 , 36 , 64 ,68 , 71 ] leverage effectively multi-view nature [ 19 ] of the dynamic human face videos to track and obtain coarse 3D face geometry and texture. Typically, detailed geometry and texture can be obtained with further optimization of 3D rep-resentations, e.g ., mesh vertex displacement [ 5, 24 ], neural implicit fields [ 18 , 71 ], or 3D Gaussians [ 23 , 64 ]. While most methods focused on personalized avatar generation, Cao et al . [ 8] introduced the concept of the universal prior model (UPM), a facial texture and geometry prior that covers a universal corpus of identities, frames, and views. This uni-versal prior facilitated the universal avatar generation from a monocular video with unprecedented texture and geometry details and has been extended to follow-up works [ 2, 36 ]. Al-though these approaches demonstrated high-fidelity avatars, they require inevitable offline facial tracking stages, which can take up to a few hours; it necessitates the tracking-free image-based approaches. The image-based approaches [ 1, 3 , 7, 20 , 21 , 26 , 34 ] aim to generate high-fidelity facial avatars from a more casual in-put, e.g ., a profile image, a portrait image, or even an internet image. The core benefit of this paradigm is that it can circum-vent the need for facial tracking. As temporal and multi-view 2Figure 2. FiCA: Pipeline Overview. FiCA generates a high-quality drivable Gaussian Codec Avatar from only a single portrait image, without offline face tracking or person-specific fine-tuning. We introduce three main modules: 1) UV texture and geometry diffusion model, 2) feed-forward UV refinement network, and 3) universal prior model. FiCA first employs fine-tuned Sapiens [ 32 ] models to obtain per-pixel UV and vertex coordinates and normal estimation, and unwraps to partial RGB, visibility mask, normal and vertex coordinates in UV space. Then, the diffusion model takes the partial UV maps, CLIP embedding [ 54 ] of the input image, and random noise to generate complete texture and geometry. The learned UV refinement network takes the generated texture and geometry as input, rich visual features of the rendered mesh image and the input image as conditions, and performs feed-forward texture and geometry refinement. Finally, the universal prior model gets expression codes, mesh texture, and geometry as inputs to generate Gaussian Codec Avatars and drive in real-time. 

cues are absent, generative priors are employed to compen-sate for the missing information. PanoHead [ 1 ] trained a tri-plane GAN for unconditional avatar generation and per-formed GAN inversion optimization [ 56 ] for personalized avatar generation. However, it could not generate multi-view consistent and controllable avatars [ 44 ]. ID-Sculpt [ 26 ] em-ployed the Score-Distillation optimization [ 51 ] to leverage the diffusion model’s prior knowledge of human heads, but it is limited in terms of generation speed. Despite huge progress in both video-/image-based ap-proaches, the prior-based optimization methods suffer from the quality and systematic complexity trade-off. In our work, we build a fast feed-forward avatar generation pipeline, com-posed of a diffusion model that directly generates texture and geometry using a single image as a condition. 

Feed-forward Avatar Generation. Learning-based feed-forward avatar generation is a promising direction for stream-lining the complex generation pipeline. Early works [ 16 , 17 ]introduced the regression-based facial texture and geometry reconstruction, where the results typically showed limited texture and the absence of detailed geometry. Recent meth-ods [ 9 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 61 , 62 ] proposed feed-forward methods to animate a 3D portrait from a single image and driving frames, and GPAvatar and GAGAvatar showed promising qualities. However, GPAvatar exhibits visual artifacts due to the dependency on tri-plane avatar representation and a sepa-rate super-resolution module. GAGAvatar generates avatars with limited expression since they simulate canonical 3D Gaussian avatars via a learned renderer network. As a concurrent work, FaceLift [ 44 ] proposes a two-stage method; first, it generates multi-view images from a single-view image and predicts 3D Gaussian [ 31 ] parameters with the transformer-based network. While the static reconstruc-tion results may look plausible, they only support dynamic avatars via per-frame 3D estimation from a video. This lim-its the visual quality with severe temporal jittering, and the avatars cannot be freely controlled by the user. In contrast, we directly generate a complete Gaussian avatar real-time drivable with any expression signals from the user. 

# 3 . Feed-forward Gaussian Codec Avatar Gener-ation from a Single Portrait Image 

We introduce FiCA, a feed-forward system to generate high-fidelity Gaussian Codec Avatars from a monocular portrait image. We visualize the FiCA pipeline in Fig. 2. At a high level, the input is a single portrait image, and the output is a drivable Codec Avatar represented in mesh-aligned 3D Gaussians. We first introduce how we leverage vision foun-dation models and generative modeling to approach this highly ill-posed task in Sec. 3.1. Then, we provide details of the feed-forward refinement module for avatar quality enhancement in Sec. 3.2. Finally, we elaborate on the 3DGS decoding and the real-time driving of the avatars in Sec. 3.3. 

3.1. Diffusion-based Avatar Texture and Geometry Generation from a Single Image 

The core module of FiCA is a diffusion model that generates complete mesh texture and geometry of avatars. We first introduce the conditioning signals for our diffusion model. 

Foundation Models for Conditioning Diffusion. A sin-gle portrait image lacks the information for complete avatar 3generation. Thus, we leverage the prior knowledge of vi-sion foundation models, CLIP [54, 65] and Sapiens [32], to extract rich features and comprehensive information. Given a portrait image Iref , we first obtain CLIP image embedding fCLIP , which encodes visual semantic information of the subject [ 54 ]. We also use the fine-tuned versions of Sapiens [ 32 ], which predict per-pixel UV coordinates of the 3D mesh surface, mesh vertex coordinates, and normals. Then, pixel RGB values, predicted normal vector, and vertex coordinates are unwrapped into partial UV texture maps using the predicted UV coordinates, resulting in four partial UV maps: UV partial =[ UV RGB , UV mask , UV nrm , UV vtx ]. We use the CLIP embedding fCLIP and partial UV maps UV partial 

as the conditions for our diffusion model. Please refer to the supplementary Sec. B.1 for the Sapiens fine-tuning details. 

Mesh as a Proxy Avatar Representation. While our final avatar representation is 3D Gaussians, we use the generated mesh texture and geometry as a proxy avatar representation. Inspired by [ 8 , 36 ], the generated mesh texture and geometry serve as ID conditioning inputs for generating and driving authentic avatars represented in 3D Gaussians, detailed later in Sec. 3.3. Note that prior methods [ 8, 36 ] used heuristic offline face tracking to obtain the ID conditioning mesh texture and geometry. In contrast, we directly generate them from just a single image using a diffusion model. 

Diffusion-based Texture and Geometry Generation. We design a diffusion model that generates complete textures and mesh geometries of avatars from the visual features and partial information. Given an image Iref , we obtain the CLIP image embedding fCLIP and partial UV maps UV partial (from Sec. 3.1). We design a latent diffusion model Fθ in the DiT architecture [ 30 , 48 ], which takes fCLIP , UV partial , domain switcher d [ 42 ], diffusion timestep t and random noise z to generate complete UV texture map ˜T ∈ RH×W ×3 and UV geometry map ˜G ∈ RH×W ×3. We use a pre-trained SDXL VAE [ 50 ] to encode partial UV maps, texture, and geometry maps into compact latent codes and map them back into the original data space. For details on the diffusion model’s architecture, please refer to the supplementary Sec. B.2. We train a single diffusion model Fθ for generating both UV texture and geometry map, using the conditional flow matching [39] objective as follows: 

Ldiffusion = ∥vT 

> t

− F θ (xT 

> t

, fCLIP , UV partial , dT, t )∥22 +

∥vG 

> t

− F θ (xG 

> t

, fCLIP , UV partial , dG, t )∥22, (1) where the superscripts T and G denote the UV texture and geometry domains, v*t denotes the ground-truth flow field, derived by the optimal transport formulation of conditional flow matching [ 39 ], x*t denotes the noise-added latents at diffusion timestep t for texture and geometry maps, and d*

is the constant, domain switcher [ 42 ] that decides which UV domain (texture or geometry) to denoise for.   

> Figure 3. Effect of Feed-forward UV Refinement. Our UV refinement network uses rich image features from (a) input image and (b) rendering of diffusion generated mesh to refine the mesh texture and geometry, resulting in enhanced avatar fidelity and ID preservation (d). For error images, the gray area means zero error.

Note that the target task of our diffusion model is differ-ent from that of diffusion-based inpainting models [ 43 , 57 ]. For casual input images, the partial UV maps obtained via Sapiens models and UV grid sampling are typically noisy as they cannot infer the accurate texture and geometries for self-occluded regions, e.g ., mouth interior, space between chin and neck, or subject’s boundaries. Moreover, UV and vertex coordinate prediction from a single image is a highly ill-posed problem with a risk of imperfection. Thus, we cannot simply trust the predictions and inpaint only for the missing parts. Instead, our diffusion model is trained to imagine complete texture and geometries from imperfect observations while preserving the ID information from the image. We embody this ability by training the diffusion model with large-scale texture and geometry assets of 3D humans, accurately collected from phone captures and high-end multi-view capture domes [2, 8, 36, 41, 59]. 

3.2. Feed-forward UV Refinement Network 

While the generated avatar in a textured mesh may already look plausible, we further enhance the fidelity and identity (ID) preservation of the avatar. We observe image-level mis-alignment between the reference image and the rendered avatars in meshes in the pixel space (see Fig. 3). To gener-ate an authentic avatar, we introduce a subsequent, learned network for texture and geometry refinement, which oper-ates in a feed-forward manner. Note that we do not perform person-specific test-time optimization [ 7, 8, 26 , 36 ] to align the avatar with the image and to enhance the quality. 

Learned UV Refinement using Sapiens Features. We propose a UV refinement network Rϕ that gets initial texture 

˜T and geometry map ˜G generated from the diffusion model, and refines them by leveraging the rich visual features of the input image and the rendered mesh image. 4Given an input image Iref (Fig. 3a) and the rendered image of the diffusion-generated avatar ˜Irdr (Fig. 3b), we extract dense visual features fref and frdr from the Sapiens ViT en-coder [ 32 ]. As Sapiens ViT encoder is pre-trained with masked-autoencoding task [ 27 ] with million-scale human-centric images, we expect the features fref and frdr to provide informative cues for minimizing the photometric error be-tween the images. We design the refinement network Rϕ

in U-Net architecture with cross-attention layers [ 63 ]. We choose the cross-attention layer, as the goal of the refinement network is to refine UV maps by referencing the conditions from the different modality, i.e ., image features. Given initial UV texture and geometry maps as in-puts, ˜T and ˜G, the refinement network performs cross-attention between UV space and Sapiens features to pro-duce the final texture and geometry maps T and G as: 

[T, G]= Rϕ([ ˜T, ˜G]; fref , frdr ). After obtaining the final UV maps, we get the final avatar that is better aligned to the input image (see Fig. 3d). During training, we use the ground-truth face pose parameter and expression code to overlay the mesh on the image and compute the image space loss. At inference time, we may use an off-the-shelf regressor, e.g . [ 11 , 55 ], to estimate the parameters. 

Training UV Refinement Network. We train Rϕ using triplets of {Iref , ˜Irdr , [ ˜T, ˜G]}. For the training objective, we use a weighted sum of L1 photometric loss, 2D keypoint loss, and mask loss on image space and regularization losses for UV texture and geometry maps as follows: 

Lrefine =λpho Lpho +λmask Lmask +λkpts Lkpts +λreg Lreg , (2) where Lpho = ∥Iref −Irdr ∥1, Lmask = ∥mref −mrdr ∥1, Lkpts =

∥kref − krdr ∥1, Lreg = ∥ ˜T − T∥2 + ∥˜L − L∥2 + ∥ ˜N − N∥2,respectively. Here, mref is the human segmentation mask of 

Iref , obtained by an off-the-shelf matting model [ 38 ], mrdr 

is the mesh foreground mask rendered by a differentiable rasterizer [ 49 ], kref is the ground-truth 2D keypoints, and krdr 

is the 2D projected positions of the keypoint-corresponding mesh vertices. Also, ˜L, L, ˜N and N denote the Laplacian matrix and normal maps of the meshes ˜G, G, respectively. The regularization terms encourage the refined UV maps to not deviate too much from the initial UV maps, preventing the network from overfitting only for the visible parts. 

3.3. Decoding Mesh into Drivable Gaussian Codec Avatar via Universal Prior Model 

Given the generated textured mesh as a proxy representation for our avatar, we convert the mesh into a set of 3D Gaus-sians as a final representation. We choose 3D Gaussians due to its efficiency and expressiveness in representing details. Inspired by prior work [ 8 , 36 ], we use a hypernetwork-based 3D Gaussian avatar generation model called the Universal Prior Model (UPM). We use the UPM to decode the gener-ated meshes into high-fidelity drivable 3D Gaussian avatars. The UPM consists of two modules, Uψ = {E ψid , Dψdec },where Eψid refers to the identity encoder, and Dψdec refers to the 3D Gaussian decoder. For training and dataset details, please refer to the supplementary Sec. B.4, and [ 8, 36 ]. The identity encoder Eψid is a CNN-based hypernetwork [ 25 ] that takes ID conditioning mesh in the form of UV texture and geometry maps, T and G, and generates ID-specific bias maps, Ψid , for the 3D Gaussian decoder. We obtain T and 

G from the previous diffusion generation and feed-forward refinement stage. The generated bias maps Ψid serve as the modulation signal for the decoder layers. The decoder 

Dψdec takes the bias maps, along with the driving signals to produce a set of 3D Gaussians that represent a Codec Avatar. For driving signals, we use expression codes e, view- and gaze-direction vectors, v and g, following [8]. In summary, given UV texture and geometry maps, T

and G, generated from the diffusion model and refinement network, we generate Codec Avatars in any expression, rep-resented with a set of 3D Gaussians as follows: 

Ψid = Eψid (T, G),

{δx, δ c, q, s, o} = Dψdec (e, v, g, Ψid ),

where δx and δc denote the position and color offsets of 3D Gaussians from the mesh surface position and color, and q,

s, and o denote the rotation, scale and opacity parameters for each 3D Gaussian primitive [31]. 

# 4. Experiments 

We first introduce the train and test datasets. Then, we provide visualizations of our generated avatars and compare FiCA with the recent competing methods. We also conduct ablation studies to support our core design choices. 

4.1. Datasets 

To train our diffusion model, we need pairs of {portrait image, UV texture/geometry map }

(see inset). Note that we show the geometry UV map in the style of a nor-mal map, just for visual-ization. We obtain these data from two heteroge-neous datasets: 1) multi-view dome captured dataset and 2) iPhone captured dataset. Following Cao et al . [ 8], we use a multi-view dome to capture dynamic facial performance, track meshes, and unwrap texture and geometry UV maps. We obtain portrait images by choosing frames from a face-looking camera. For iPhone captures, we obtain portrait images from rear-camera frames, track meshes, and unwrap UV texture/geometry maps from monocular videos. We col-lect total 1,948 identities (IDs) for the dome dataset and split 5Figure 4. Qualitative Results . We show the animated results of our generated 3D Gaussian avatars for test IDs and novel expressions. Our FiCA generates authentic, ID-preserving avatars for diverse attributes, e.g ., races, genders, ages, hairstyles, and expressions, only from a single image. Also, the input image’s visual details, such as tattoos or accessories, are faithfully reflected in the 3D Gaussian avatars. Note that FiCA can generate unseen observations from the input image, such as the mouth interior and eye pupil, aided by our diffusion model. Please refer to the supplementary video for the dynamic avatar animation results. 

into 1,932 train and 16 test IDs. For the iPhone dataset, we collect 12,539 IDs, split into 12,439 train and 100 test IDs. For training the feed-forward UV refinement network, we render the diffusion generation results and build pairs of 

{portrait image, generated mesh image }, and train the model in a self-supervised manner (Eq. (2)). 

4.2. Qualitative Results 

In Fig. 4, we visualize the generated 3D Gaussian avatars for unseen test IDs. To show FiCA’s generalization capability, we choose test IDs with diverse human attributes, including races, genders, ages, and hairstyles. Given only a single portrait image and random driving expressions, our method generates realistic and ID-preserving Gaussian avatars. From the results, we observe that the visual details in the input image, e.g ., tattoos or necklace, are well reflected in the generated 3D Gaussian avatars. As we use the vision founda-tion models to obtain the conditioning data for the diffusion model, FiCA pipeline is robust to the input image charac-teristics, such as the body coverage in the image and the camera’s position. Furthermore, FiCA can imagine the un-observed facial areas, e.g ., interior mouth or eye pupil, and reasonably generates the missing textures and geometries, thanks to our conditional diffusion formulation.     

> Figure 5. Qualitative Comparison: Static Avatar. PanoHead takes ∼80 secs. to generate an avatar with per-subject GAN inver-sion. For FiCA (ours), we visualize the textured meshes, which takes ∼5 seconds to generate. FiCA shows better completeness, especially for extreme viewpoints. Note that the FiCA meshes are later decoded into animatable 3D Gaussians with visual details.

4.3. Comparison with Competing Methods 

Competing Methods. We compare FiCA’s textured mesh generation quality with PanoHead. PanoHead reconstructs full 3D head avatar from a single portrait, via 3D-aware GAN inversion optimization [56] (takes ∼80 secs per image). 6Figure 6. Qualitative Comparison: Animated Avatar. We compare FiCA with recent 3D portrait animation methods [ 9, 10 , 13 , 14 , 62 ]. Given an input portrait image of held-out identity, we generate avatars using all methods and drive them using tracked driving expression codes of the same identity. FiCA shows better avatar rendering quality, especially for extreme expressions and skin tones. 

We compare the quality of FiCA’s avatars under dynamic expressions with recent monocular 3D avatar animation methods: GPAvatar [ 10 ], VOODOO 3D [ 62 ], Portrait4D-v1/v2 [ 13 , 14 ] and GAGAvatar [ 9 ]. Given a source image, each method generates an avatar in various 3D represen-tations, e.g ., tri-plane or 3D Gaussians. The avatare are animated using offline tracked FLAME [ 37 ] meshes. For all the comparisons, we use held-out test IDs from our datasets. 

Static Avatar Reconstruction Comparison. In Fig. 5, we compare the visual quality of the generated static head avatars from PanoHead [ 1] and our method. PanoHead and FiCA take only a single portrait image as an input and gen-erate avatars in tri-plane and textured mesh, respectively. FiCA generates more realistic and view-consistent complete head avatars than PanoHead. Specifically, PanoHead suffers from severe visual artifacts such as ghost face or floaters for side or back views, whereas our method can create view-consistent and realistic face texture and geometry. Also, PanoHead requires per-image GAN inversion to obtain per-sonalized latent codes, which takes about 15 × longer execu-tion time than our feed-forward generation pipeline. More importantly, avatars generated via PanoHead remain static and cannot be animated as they are not anchored with con-trollable expression parameters. In contrast, our mesh-based avatars can be animated in real-time with arbitrary expres-sion codes obtained from tracking [ 9, 53 , 67 ], head-mounted cameras [4], or multi-modal generative models [47]. 

Animated Avatar Comparison. We evaluate the anima-tion quality of the generated avatars and compare with the recent competing methods [ 9, 10 , 13 , 14 , 62 ]. For FiCA, we first generate canonical Gaussian avatars for the unseen test ID using our feed-forward pipeline. We use 16 held-out IDs from our dome capture dataset, covering diverse races, genders, and hairstyles. We tracked per-frame expression 

Table 1. Quantitative Comparison: Animated Avatar. We eval-uate the animation quality of the generated avatars using recent competing methods and FiCA (mesh & 3DGS). For pairs of input portrait images and facial videos of 16 held-out IDs, avatars created by FiCA show superior photometric quality and ID preservation.                                

> PSNR ( ↑)SSIM ( ↑)LPIPS ( ↓)ID-CSIM ( ↑)GPAvatar [10] 19.565 0.7648 0.1915 0.3166 VOODOO 3D [62] 19.321 0.6983 0.2756 0.4339 Portrait4D-v1 [13] 15.006 0.3743 0.4138 0.2135 Portrait4D-v2 [14] 15.704 0.3871 0.3765 0.2545 GAGAvatar [9] 22.157 0.7513 0.1320 0.3522
> FiCA Ours/Mesh 24.281 0.9625 0.1381 0.5233
> FiCA Ours/3DGS 24.508 0.9637 0.1365 0.5867

codes for each test ID with corresponding video frames (to-tal ∼1,500 frames). Finally, we drive the generated avatar using the unseen expression codes, i.e ., zero-shot animation. For competing methods, we follow their 3D face tracking protocol and pipeline to animate their generated avatars for test IDs using the driving video sequence (see Fig. 6). In Table 1, we report the photometric reconstruction met-rics, i.e ., PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. We compute these met-rics between the ground-truth face capture frames and the renderings of the animated generated avatars by each method. We compute metrics only for the face region to avoid in-fluence from the background. FiCA outperforms all the competing methods in terms of PSNR and SSIM and shows a comparable score with GAGAvatar in LPIPS. We also evaluate the ID preservation and report the ID similarity metric (ID-CSIM). We compute the cosine similarity of Ar-cFace [ 12 ] embedding extracted from the source portrait image and the renderings of generated dynamic avatars. We use DeepFace implementation for computing ID-CSIM [ 60 ]. FiCA achieves a higher ID-CSIM score than the other meth-ods, supporting the superiority of our method in generating ID-preserving, authentic avatars from a single image. 7Figure 7. Ablation Study: Qualitative. We visualize the effects of the design choices of FiCA. Compared to the (a) diffusion model trained with only a partial RGB texture map, the (b) diffusion model trained with partial UV maps of normal and 3D vertex estimation helps achieve the person-specific geometric details, while (c) adding CLIP image embedding improves the details, such as the hood. Adding our feed-forward UV refinement network (d) helps achieve the best quality avatar with realistic skin tone and geometries. Table 2. Ablation Study: Quantitative. We evaluate the quality of generated avatars by ablating core design components. Our diffu-sion model conditioned with partial observations from Sapiens [ 32 ], semantic features from CLIP [ 54 ], and the feed-forward refinement network helps achieve the highest quality avatars.                                 

> Diffusion Model Config. FF Ref. Net. Metrics UV RGB UV nrm,vtx fCLIP -PSNR ( ↑)SSIM ( ↑)LPIPS ( ↓)
> ✓---19.504 0.8140 0.1806
> ✓✓--19.644 0.8164 0.1667
> ✓✓✓-19.738 0.8431 0.1648
> ✓✓✓✓22.282 0.8804 0.1569

The qualitative comparison results in Fig. 6 show that our method generates more authentic avatars, especially for skin tones and extreme facial expressions, even for zero-shot test IDs. GPAvatar produces severe visual artifacts on the avatars, possibly caused by their implicit avatar representation of tri-plane+MLPs and subsequent super-resolution module. GAGAvatar shows better quality than GPAvatar but still suffers from the limited expressivity of the generated avatars. We postulate this is because GAGAvatar does not directly infer dynamic avatars in explicit 3D Gaussians. GAGAvatar estimates a canonical 3D Gaussian avatar and uses its learned neural renderer to simulate dynamic avatars, which may not generalize well to extreme expressions. 

4.4. Ablation Study 

In Fig. 7, we visualize the effects of our core system de-sign choices. We show 3D Gaussian Avatars in the neutral pose and expression and in textured 3D meshes reposed to match the subject in the image. We mainly investigate the effects of conditioning information for the diffusion model. In Fig. 7a, we show the avatar generated with the diffusion 

Figure 8. Application: Feed-forward Avatar Editing. We show-case an application scenario of FiCA. Given an input portrait image, we can use a 2D image editing method to edit images in 2D. Our feed-forward pipeline creates stylized and drivable Gaussian avatars without heuristic 3D space optimization or manipulation. 

model, trained to generate complete texture and geometry only from a partial UV RGB texture map. As pixel val-ues of RGB UV maps are insufficient to reason about the geometries of a subject, severe identity shift and geometry misalignment occur. By adding geometry cues with nor-mal and 3D vertex UV maps as conditions, we obtain an improved avatar with reasonable geometry (Fig. 7b). Then, with the CLIP embedding injected as a conditioning sig-nal for the diffusion model, we obtain details such as hood (Fig. 7c). Finally, by adding the subsequent feed-forward UV refinement network (Sec. 3.2), we obtain a high-quality avatar with the vivid skin tone and realism (Fig. 7d). In Ta-ble 2, we quantitatively compare the model design variants on 100 iPhone capture held-out test IDs, and the metrics align with the visual differences. 

# 5. Conclusion, Discussion and Limitations 

We present FiCA, a feed-forward system to generate an authentic Gaussian Codec Avatar from a single image. Our system connects human-centric vision foundation models with a diffusion model to generate complete head texture and geometry. Our feed-forward texture/geometry refinement network further improves the fidelity and ID preservation of generated avatars. FiCA shows remarkable avatar generation and animation quality for diverse IDs and novel expressions. As a promising use-case, we can consider feed-forward editing of Gaussian Codec Avatars. Given a portrait image, we can use a 2D image editing method, e.g ., [ 6, 70 ], to generate stylized portrait image, and use FiCA to generate drivable Codec Avatar (see Fig. 8). This can enable efficient 3D avatar stylization and editing paradigms without the need for heuristic optimization or manipulation in the 3D domain. Currently, FiCA can be vulnerable to extreme visual arti-facts that may present in input portrait images, e.g ., extreme lighting or motion blur. For our diffusion model, embodying a learned light normalization capability or blur correction for texture maps could be an interesting research problem. More-over, extending FiCA to support the joint generation of lay-ered texture and geometry for accessories, e.g ., glasses [ 35 ], from a portrait image would be a promising future direction. 8References 

[1] Sizhe An, Hongyi Xu, Yichun Shi, Guoxian Song, Umit Y. Ogras, and Linjie Luo. Panohead: Geometry-aware 3d full-head synthesis in 360deg. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2, 3, 7 [2] ShahRukh Athar, Shunsuke Saito, Zhengyu Yang, Stanislav Pidhorsky, and Chen Cao. Bridging the gap: Studio-like avatar creation from a monocular phone capture. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 2, 4 [3] Haoran Bai, Di Kang, Haoxian Zhang, Jinshan Pan, and Linchao Bao. Ffhq-uv: Normalized facial uv-texture dataset for 3d face reconstruction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2 [4] Shaojie Bai, Te-Li Wang, Chenghui Li, Akshay Venkatesh, Tomas Simon, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Jason Saragih, Yaser Sheikh, and Shih-En Wei. Universal facial encoding of codec avatars from vr headsets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 43(4), 2024. 7 [5] Shrisha Bharadwaj, Yufeng Zheng, Otmar Hilliges, Michael J. Black, and Victoria Fernandez Abrevaya. Flare: Fast learning of animatable and relightable mesh avatars. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 42:15, 2023. 2 [6] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. In-structpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , pages 18392–18402, 2023. 8 [7] Marcel C. Buehler, Gengyan Li, Erroll Wood, Leonhard Helminger, Xu Chen, Tanmay Shah, Daoye Wang, Stephan Garbin, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Otmar Hilliges, Dmitry Lagun, J ´er ´emy Riviere, Paulo Gotardo, Thabo Beeler, Abhimitra Meka, and Kripasindhu Sarkar. Cafca: High-quality novel view synthesis of expressive faces from casual few-shot cap-tures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) ,2024. 2, 4 [8] Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke Saito, Stephen Lombardi, Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Authentic volumetric avatars from a phone scan. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 41(4), 2022. 2, 4, 5, 14 [9] Xuangeng Chu and Tatsuya Harada. Generalizable and ani-matable gaussian head avatar. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. 3, 7, 12 [10] Xuangeng Chu, Yu Li, Ailing Zeng, Tianyu Yang, Lijian Lin, Yunfei Liu, and Tatsuya Harada. GPAvatar: Generaliz-able and precise head avatar from image(s). In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 3, 7 [11] Radek Danecek, Michael J. Black, and Timo Bolkart. EMOCA: Emotion driven monocular face capture and anima-tion. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 5 [12] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recogni-tion. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 7 [13] Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, Xiaohang Ren, Xingyu Chen, and Baoyuan Wang. Portrait4d: Learning one-shot 4d head avatar synthesis using synthetic data. In IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 3, 7, 12 [14] Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, and Baoyuan Wang. Portrait4d-v2: Pseudo multi-view data creates better 4d head synthesizer. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 3, 7, 12 [15] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim En-tezari, Jonas M ¨uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. 13 [16] Haiwen Feng, Timo Bolkart, Joachim Tesch, Michael J. Black, and Victoria Abrevaya. Towards racially unbiased skin tone estimation via scene disambiguation. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2022. 3 [17] Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael J. Black, and Timo Bolkart. Learning an animatable detailed 3D face model from in-the-wild images. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) ,40(8), 2021. 3 [18] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Niessner. Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d facial avatar reconstruction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. 2 [19] Hang Gao, Ruilong Li, Shubham Tulsiani, Bryan Russell, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Monocular dynamic view synthesis: A reality check. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. 2 [20] Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Ganfit: Generative adversarial network fitting for high fidelity 3d face reconstruction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 2 [21] Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos P Zafeiriou. Fast-ganfit: Generative adversarial network for high fidelity 3d face reconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) , 2021. 2 [22] Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Markos Georgopou-los, Martin R ¨unz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. Mononphm: Dynamic head reconstruction from monocular videos. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [23] Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin R ¨unz, Lour-des Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. Npga: Neural parametric gaussian avatars. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIG-GRAPH Asia) , 2024. 2 [24] Philip-William Grassal, Malte Prinzler, Titus Leistner, Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Neural head avatars from monocular rgb videos. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2[25] David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. 5 [26] Jinkun Hao, Junshu Tang, Jiangning Zhang, Ran Yi, Yijia Hong, Moran Li, Weijian Cao, Yating Wang, and Lizhuang 

9Ma. Id-sculpt: Id-aware 3d head generation from single in-the-wild portrait image. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2024. 2, 3, 4 [27] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Doll ´ar, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 5, 13 [28] Mingming He, Pascal Clausen, Ahmet Levent Ta s¸ el, Li Ma, Oliver Pilarski, Wenqi Xian, Laszlo Rikker, Xueming Yu, Ryan Burgert, Ning Yu, and Paul Debevec. Diffrelight: Diffusion-based facial performance relighting. In ACM Trans-actions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [29] Hanbyul Joo, Hao Liu, Lei Tan, Lin Gui, Bart Nabbe, Iain Matthews, Takeo Kanade, Shohei Nobuhara, and Yaser Sheikh. Panoptic studio: A massively multiview system for social motion capture. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2015. 2 [30] Yash Kant, Ethan Weber, Jin Kyu Kim, Rawal Khirodkar, Su Zhaoen, Julieta Martinez, Igor Gilitschenski, Shunsuke Saito, and Timur Bagautdinov. Pippo: High-resolution multi-view humans from a single image. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 4, 13, 14 [31] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk ¨uhler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radi-ance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIG-GRAPH) , 42(4), 2023. 1, 2, 3, 5 [32] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-els. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2024. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 13 [33] Tobias Kirschstein, Shenhan Qian, Simon Giebenhain, Tim Walter, and Matthias Nießner. Nersemble: Multi-view radi-ance field reconstruction of human heads. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 42(4), 2023. 2, 12 [34] Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Stylianos Ploumpis, Baris Gecer, Jiankang Deng, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Fitme: Deep photorealistic 3d morphable model avatars. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2 [35] Junxuan Li, Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Stephen Lom-bardi, Hongdong Li, and Jason Saragih. Megane: Morphable eyeglass and avatar network. In IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 8 [36] Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shun-suke Saito. Uravatar: Universal relightable gaussian codec avatars. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 2024. 2, 4, 5, 14 [37] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael. J. Black, Hao Li, and Javier Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 36(6), 2017. 7 [38] Shanchuan Lin, Linjie Yang, Imran Saleemi, and Soumyadip Sengupta. Robust high-resolution video matting with tem-poral guidance. In IEEE Winter Conf. on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 2022. 5 [39] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximil-ian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2023. 4 [40] Stephen Lombardi, Jason Saragih, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. Deep appearance models for face rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 37(4):68:1–68:13, 2018. 1, 2 [41] Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Gabriel Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Mixture of volumetric primitives for efficient neural rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 40(4), 2021. 1, 2, 4 [42] Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al. Wonder3d: Single im-age to 3d using cross-domain diffusion. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 4[43] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2022. 4 [44] Weijie Lyu, Yi Zhou, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Zhixin Shu. Facelift: Single image to 3d head with view generation and gs-lrm. arXiv preprint, 2412.17812 , 2024. 3 [45] Shugao Ma, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Dawei Wang, Yuecheng Li, Fernando De La Torre, and Yaser Sheikh. Pixel codec avatars. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. 1 [46] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-thesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2020. 1 [47] Evonne Ng, Javier Romero, Timur Bagautdinov, Shaojie Bai, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Alexander Richard. From audio to photoreal embodiment: Synthesizing humans in conversations. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 7 [48] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. 4, 13 [49] Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Tomas Simon, Gabriel Schwartz, He Wen, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Rasterized edge gra-dients: Handling discontinuities differentiably. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 5 [50] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas M ¨uller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 4, 13 [51] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. 3 

10 [52] Ekta Prashnani, Koki Nagano, Shalini De Mello, David Lue-bke, and Orazio Gallo. Avatar fingerprinting for authorized use of synthetic talking-head videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 14 [53] Shenhan Qian, Tobias Kirschstein, Liam Schoneveld, Davide Davoli, Simon Giebenhain, and Matthias Nießner. Gaussiana-vatars: Photorealistic head avatars with rigged 3d gaussians. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , 2024. 7 [54] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. 3, 4, 8 [55] George Retsinas, Panagiotis P. Filntisis, Radek Danecek, Vic-toria F. Abrevaya, Anastasios Roussos, Timo Bolkart, and Petros Maragos. 3d facial expressions through analysis-by-neural-synthesis. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 5 [56] Daniel Roich, Ron Mokady, Amit H. Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Pivotal tuning for latent-based editing of real images. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 42(1), 2022. 3, 6 [57] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj ¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 4[58] Andreas R ¨ossler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Chris-tian Riess, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner. Faceforensics: A large-scale video dataset for forgery detection in human faces. arXiv preprint, 1803.09179 , 2018. 14 [59] Shunsuke Saito, Gabriel Schwartz, Tomas Simon, Junxuan Li, and Giljoo Nam. Relightable gaussian codec avatars. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024. 1, 4 [60] Sefik Ilkin Serengil and Alper Ozpinar. Hyperextended lightface: A facial attribute analysis framework. In Inter-national Conference on Engineering and Emerging Technolo-gies (ICEET) , 2021. 7 [61] Phong Tran, Egor Zakharov, Long-Nhat Ho, Liwen Hu, Adil-bek Karmanov, Aviral Agarwal, McLean Goldwhite, Ari-ana Bermudez Venegas, Anh Tuan Tran, and Hao Li. Voodoo xp: Expressive one-shot head reenactment for vr telepresence. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 2024. 3 [62] Phong Tran, Egor Zakharov, Long-Nhat Ho, Anh Tuan Tran, Liwen Hu, and Hao Li. Voodoo 3d: Volumetric portrait disen-tanglement for one-shot 3d head reenactment. In IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2024. 3, 7, 12 [63] Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul, Mishig Davaadorj, Dhruv Nair, Sayak Paul, William Berman, Yiyi Xu, Steven Liu, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. 

https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers ,2022. 5, 14 [64] Jun Xiang, Xuan Gao, Yudong Guo, and Juyong Zhang. Flashavatar: High-fidelity head avatar with efficient gaus-sian embedding. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [65] Hu Xu, Saining Xie, Xiaoqing Tan, Po-Yao Huang, Russell Howes, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Gargi Ghosh, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Demystifying CLIP data. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2024. 4 [66] Jae Shin Yoon, Zhixuan Yu, Jaesik Park, and Hyun Soo Park. Humbi: A large multiview dataset of human body expressions and benchmark challenge. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) , 45(1):623–640, 2023. 2 [67] Kim Youwang, Lee Hyun, Kim Sung-Bin, Suekyeong Nam, Janghoon Ju, and Tae-Hyun Oh. A large-scale 3d face mesh video dataset via neural re-parameterized optimization. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) , 2024. 7 [68] Kim Youwang, Lee Hyoseok, Park Subin, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Tae-Hyun Oh. ELITE: Efficient Gaussian Head Avatar from a Monocular Video via Learned Initialization and TEst-time Generative Adaptation. In CVPR , 2026. 2 [69] Zhixuan Yu, Jae Shin Yoon, In Kyu Lee, Prashanth Venkatesh, Jaesik Park, Jihun Yu, and Hyun Soo Park. Humbi: A large multiview dataset of human body expressions. In IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2020. 2 [70] Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. 8 [71] Wojciech Zielonka, Timo Bolkart, and Justus Thies. Instant volumetric head avatars. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2 

11 FiCA: Feed-forward Instant Gaussian Codec Avatars from a Single Portrait Image 

# — Supplementary Material — 

# Kim Youwang 1,2∗ Zhengyu Yang 1 Liuhao Ge 1 Yu Rong 1 Timur Bagautdinov 1 Su Zhaoen 1

# Nir Sopher 1 Jovan Popovi´ c1 Teng Deng 1 Tae-Hyun Oh 2,3 Chen Cao 1  

> 1Codec Avatars Lab, Meta 2Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH 3School of Computing, KAIST

In this supplementary material, we provide addi-tional details and results for FiCA that are not in-cluded in the main paper due to the space limit. Also, we encourage readers to watch the attached video ,where we show dynamic avatar visualizations. 

# Contents 

1. Introduction 12. Related Work 23. Feed-forward Gaussian Codec Avatar Generation from a Single Portrait Image 3

3.1. Diffusion-based Avatar Texture and Geometry Generation from a Single Image . . . . . . 33.2. Feed-forward UV Refinement Network . . . 43.3. Decoding Mesh into Drivable Gaussian Codec Avatar via Universal Prior Model . . . . . . 5

4. Experiments 5

4.1. Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54.2. Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64.3. Comparison with Competing Methods . . . . 64.4. Ablation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

5. Conclusion, Discussion and Limitations 8A. Video for Summary & Visual Results 12 B. More Results 12 C. Details of FiCA Pipeline 13 

C.1. Fine-tuned Sapiens for UV, Normal and Ver-tex Coordinates Prediction . . . . . . . . . 13 C.2. Latent Diffusion Model . . . . . . . . . . . 13 C.3. Feed-forward UV Refinement Net . . . . . . 14 C.4. Universal Prior Model . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

D. Broader Impacts & Ethical Considerations 14 

# A. Video for Summary & Visual Results 

In the attached video, we provide the following content: • FiCA overview and how it works. • Videos of avatars generated by FiCA. • Visual comparisons w/ competing methods [ 9, 13 , 14 , 62 ]. 

# B. More Results 

In Fig. S1-a, we visualize the generated meshes from our proposed diffusion-based mesh texture & geometry UV map generation, for the portrait images from the internet. Al-though our diffusion model for mesh generation has been trained on 1) a multi-view dome-captured dataset and 2) an iPhone-captured dataset, it generalizes to diverse facial attributes, e.g ., make-up, hairstyles, and clothing from in-the-wild portrait images. We postulate that this generalization capability stems from the model’s large-scale human-centric pre-training, which we will detail later in Sec. C.2. The gen-erated meshes are then queried to the Universal Prior Model (UPM), decoded into drivable 3D Gaussian Codec Avatars for real-world telepresence applications (Fig. S1-b). In Fig. S2, we visualize the comparison between FiCA-generated 3D meshes and the ground-truth meshes for the unseen test identities. From the results, the FiCA-generated meshes closely resemble the ground-truth meshes with vivid texture and detailed geometries. Also, note that our gener-ated meshes do not suffer from multi-view inconsistencies, as our diffusion-based mesh generation works as UV in-/out-painting, i.e ., FiCA generates holistic UV mesh texture and geometry with a single diffusion inference process. In Fig. S3, we show the Codec Avatar generated from the NerSemble [ 33 ] identities. These identities are held out, i.e ., none of the FiCA modules have seen them during training. FiCA generalizes well to these held-out unseen identities. Notably, FiCA robustly generates avatars even from input images with oblique head views. Although we haven not explicitly designed techniques for these cases, our mesh generation scheme, i.e ., UV in-/out-painting conditioned on partially observed visual cues (texture, normal, 3D vertex), helps FiCA generalize to such side-view portrait cases. 12 Figure S1. Avatar generation result for in-the-wild internet image.   

> Figure S2. FiCA meshes compared with GT meshes.
> Figure S3. Avatar results for NerSemble {frontal / rotated }images.

# C. Details of FiCA Pipeline 

C.1. Fine-tuned Sapiens for UV, Normal and Vertex Coordinates Prediction 

Sapiens [ 32 ] is a human-centric vision foundation model that is pre-trained on large-scale in-the-wild datasets with the masked autoencoder (MAE) task [ 27 ]. After pre-training, it can be fine-tuned to perform human-centric perception tasks, such as segmentation or depth/normal estimation. For our pipeline, we fine-tune the Sapiens models for predicting per-pixel UV coordinates, vertex coordinates, and normals from a single portrait image. 

Architecture. We largely follow the architecture of the pre-trained Sapiens-1B model. For UV coordinates and vertex coordinates prediction, we use the weights of the Sapiens-1B image encoder and add a decoder similar to that of Sapiens-1B (depth). For normal prediction, we directly start from Sapiens-1B (normal). We jointly fine-tune the image encoder and the task-specific decoders using a smaller learning rate for the image encoder. 

Dataset. We use an internal iPhone capture dataset contain-ing quarter-body videos of approximately 12,000 identities. All frames in the dataset are tracked and annotated using 3D mesh and texture. We rasterized UV coordinates, vertex coordinates, and normals into image space to prepare the annotations. For vertex coordinates, we adjust the head pose so that the mesh consistently faces forward. 

Training. During training, we sample frames using pre-computed per-frame importance weights to ensure diverse head poses and geometric shapes. The frames are augmented with random cropping, scaling, and photometric distortions. For UV and vertex coordinates, we use the L1 loss, and for normals, we use cosine similarity loss. We use 512 NVIDIA A100 GPUs for 12 hours to train the model for each task. 

C.2. Latent Diffusion Model 

In FiCA, the core module is the latent diffusion model that generates the complete head texture and geometry in UV maps, given the partial UV observations obtained from the fine-tuned Sapiens models. 

Dataset. We use the UV texture map ( T) and geometry map (G), where T, G ∈ RH×W ×3, for training the diffusion model. We set H = W = 512 . The UV texture has a pixel value range similar to that of RGB images. In contrast, the UV geometry maps contain an unbalanced value range across channels, caused by coordinate values from human meshes (high y channel values due to human height). Thus, we pre-compute the mean and standard deviation of the meshes in our dataset and normalize all the geometry assets. 

Architecture. The design of our latent diffusion model follows the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [ 48 ] and Pippo [ 30 ]. We use the pre-trained SDXL VAE [ 50 ] and perform 8 ×

compression of UV texture and geometry maps, resulting in 

32 ×32 ×16 dimension for the latent codes. We then patchify the latent codes (of the UV texture and geometry maps) using a linear layer with a patch size of 2. We use a fixed sinusoidal 2D positional encoding for the latent patches. The conditioning data for our diffusion model are the partial UV maps obtained from the Sapiens models and the CLIP image embedding of the reference image. We follow the pixel-aligned control method, ControlMLP, proposed in Pippo [ 30 ] to condition the model with partial UV maps and generate UV maps. Also, we inject the CLIP image embedding along with the diffusion timestep embedding in the form of scale, shift, and gate modulation, similar to Stable Diffusion 3 [ 15 ]. We stack 28 DiT+ControlMLP blocks, and the total number of learnable parameters in the diffusion model amounts to 2B parameters. 

Training. For training our diffusion model, we first conduct image-only pre-training using a large-scale human-centric 13 dataset, following [ 30 ]. For pre-training details, please refer to Pippo [ 30 ]. Then, we fine-tune the model with pairs of 

{portrait image, UV texture/geometry maps }, via Eq. (1) in the main paper. We train the diffusion model for 50K steps with an effective batch size of 128 on 64 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, which takes about 2 days to converge. 

Sampling. When sampling from the trained diffusion model, we perform 50 steps of flow estimation and updates. In a single step, we perform two DiT forward operations by changing the domain switcher d, that decides which do-main (texture or geometry) to predict the flow field for (see Sec. 3.1). The total sampling time takes about 4 seconds. 

C.3. Feed-forward UV Refinement Net 

For the feed-forward UV refinement network, we follow the architecture of UNet2DConditionModel from Dif-fusers [ 63 ]. As detailed in Sec. 3.2, the input to the UNet is the generated UV texture and geometry maps from the diffusion model. The condition to the UNet is the rich image features extracted from the reference image and the mesh rendering. We use the pre-trained Sapiens ViT encoder as the feature extraction module. In Eq. (2) of the main pa-per, we empirically set λpho =2 .0, λmask =0 .5, λkpts =0 .01 ,and λreg =1 .0. We train the UV refinement network for 50K steps with an effective batch size of 128 on 32 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, which takes about 2 days to converge. 

C.4. Universal Prior Model 

The Universal Prior Model (UPM) serves as the decoder module to convert the generated UV texture and geometry into the detailed and drivable 3D Gaussian avatar. We follow the UPM architectures of [ 8, 36 ] with several modifications. First, we broaden the universal corpus of the UPM train-ing dataset, by using the video frames of 1,927 identities (was 255 in [ 8], 345 in [ 36 ]), captured from 160 multi-view calibrated cameras. Also, we change the linear color space photometric loss for training the UPM (Eq. (7) from Chen et al . [ 8 ]) to the RGB space, using the pre-computed color correction matrix. This is for the compatibility between the generated UV texture maps and UPM, as FiCA generates RGB space texture maps. We use 128 NVIDIA A100 GPUs to train the UPM, which takes about 3 weeks to converge. 

# D. Broader Impacts & Ethical Considerations 

Societal Impact. The primary goal of FiCA is to enabling accessible high-fidelity avatar synthesis for applications in telepresence, mixed reality, and we recognize the potential risks associated with misuse. To mitigate these risks, we advocate for the community’s ongoing efforts in avatar fin-gerprinting [ 52 ] and digital media forensics [ 58 ] to support the detection of synthetic media. 

Dataset Disclosure. We disclose that the collection and use of all human datasets have been conducted in strict accor-dance with ethical guidelines. We have obtained informed consent from the subjects involved in the data collection. 14