Title: CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.19350v1

Published Time: Wed, 20 May 2026 00:46:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control 

# HABIB SLIM ∗, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia 

# SHARIQ FAROOQ BHAT, Adobe Research, United States of America 

# MOHAMED ELHOSEINY, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia 

# YIFAN WANG, Adobe Research, United States of America 

# MIKE ROBERTS, Adobe Research, United States of America 

Fig. 1. Our method for synthesizing 3D shapes takes as input a text prompt and a set of coarse geometric primitives (e.g., bounding boxes) that represent distinct object parts that a user would like to manipulate individually. From this input, our method synthesizes part-separated 3D objects that align with the user’s geometric primitives and text prompt ( A and additional results on the left). Our method enables compositional synthesis and editing , i.e., we synthesize 3D shapes in a way that allows for localized granular editing of individual parts. For example, our method enables style-preserving resizing ( B , left) and text-based editing of individual parts ( B , right), as well as context-aware part substitution ( C ). 

Creating and editing high-quality 3D content remains a central challenge in computer graphics. We address this challenge by introducing CompoSE , a novel method for Compo sitional Synthesis and Editing of 3D shapes via part-aware control. Our method takes as input a set of coarse geometric prim-itives (e.g., bounding boxes) that represent distinct object parts arranged in a particular spatial configuration, and synthesizes as output part-separated 3D objects that support localized granular (i.e., compositional) editing of individual parts. The key insight that enables our method is our use of a diffusion transformer architecture that alternates between processing each part locally and aggregating contextual information across parts globally, and features a novel conditioning technique that ensures strong adherence 

> ∗

Corresponding author. Authors’ Contact Information: Habib Slim, habib.slim@kaust.edu.sa, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia; Shariq Farooq Bhat, shariqb@adobe.com, Adobe Research, San Francisco, United States of America; Mohamed Elhoseiny, mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia; Yifan Wang, yifwang@adobe.com, Adobe Research, United States of America; Mike Roberts, miroberts@adobe.com, Adobe Research, United States of America. 

to the user’s input. Importantly, our method learns to infer part semantics and symmetries directly from the user’s coarse layout guidance, and does not require part-level text prompts. We demonstrate that our method enables powerful part-level editing capabilities, including context-aware substitu-tion, addition, deletion, and style-preserving resizing operations. We show through extensive experiments that our method significantly outperforms existing approaches on guided synthesis, as measured by objective metrics and LLM-based evaluations. 

1 Introduction 

Creating and editing high-quality 3D content remains a central chal-lenge in many creative industries, including film, design, simulation, and manufacturing. In response, the computer graphics community has developed a variety of generative AI methods for synthesizing 3D shapes from high-level user input [Chen et al . 2024b, 2025b; Elizarov et al . 2025; Gu et al . 2002; He et al . 2025; Hoppe 2004; Karnewar et al . 2023; Mittal et al . 2022; Nakayama et al . 2023; Nash   

> arXiv:2605.19350v1 [cs.GR] 19 May 2026 1:2 •Slim et al.

et al . 2020; Nichol et al . 2022; Niemeyer and Geiger 2021; Park et al .2019; Poole et al . 2023; Sanghi et al . 2023; Siddiqui et al . 2024; Slim and Elhoseiny 2024; Team 2024, 2025a,b; Vogel et al . 2024; Wu et al .2023b; Yan et al . 2025; Zeng et al . 2022; Zhang et al . 2022, 2023d]. However, many of these methods rely on language descriptions to guide their output, and the resulting user interfaces can be noto-riously unpredictable [Agrawala 2023], especially when a user is attempting to specify the precise spatial configuration of individual object parts using text prompts. In an effort to provide more precise user controls, a variety of methods have been proposed that accept richer forms of guidance, such as 2D images [HexaGen 2024; Hyper3D 2024; Li et al . 2025b,d; Meshy AI 2024; Ren et al . 2024; Team 2024, 2025a,b; Xiang et al . 2024; Zhang et al . 2024], a global bounding box [Roblox 2025; Zhang et al .2024], or proxy shapes [Chen et al . 2025a,c, 2023; Dong et al . 2024b; Sella et al . 2024; Zhang et al . 2024]. Additionally, methods have been proposed to generate part-separated outputs [Dong et al . 2025; Lin et al . 2025; Tang et al . 2025; Yang et al . 2025a,b; Zhang et al . 2025] to facilitate downstream applications. However, although some of these methods generate part-separated outputs , none of them ac-cepts part-separated inputs . The choice made by existing methods to model the user’s intent through a single monolithic object (i.e., without individual parts) also limits predictability, because small changes in the user’s input can lead to significant changes in the synthesized output, potentially altering the entire generated 3D shape. More generally, no existing method supports compositional synthesis and editing (i.e ., synthesizing part-separated objects in a way that allows for localized granular editing of individual parts), which is essential in professional content creation scenarios. In this work, we introduce CompoSE , a novel method for 

Compo sitional Synthesis and Editing of 3D shapes via part-aware control. Our method synthesizes part-separated 3D shapes from a set of coarse geometric primitives ( e.g ., bounding boxes) in a particular spatial configuration, and a global text prompt. In our method, each geometric primitive represents a distinct object part that the user can manipulate individually. The key insight that enables composi-tional synthesis and editing in our method is our use of a diffusion transformer (DiT) architecture [Ho et al . 2020; Peebles and Xie 2023; Vaswani et al . 2017] that processes each input geometric primitive in parallel, and strategically alternates between two types of DiT blocks. Local blocks process spatial layout information for individual primitives, and provide high-fidelity control over the geometry of each synthesized object part; while global blocks aggregate context cues and text information across object parts to ensure stylistic coherence and structural validity. Our architecture design enables compositional editing by allow-ing the user to spatially manipulate a specific geometric primitive that is given as input to a local block, while optionally freezing the latent variables associated with other local blocks at inference time. The 3D shapes resulting from this inference procedure adhere to user edits, while also preserving the identity of existing object parts exactly. To summarize, our main contributions are as follows: (1) We present the first method to synthesize part-separated 3D shapes from coarse part layouts, featuring a novel condition-ing technique that ensures strong adherence to the user’s input layout, and a high degree of control over individual object parts. (2) We enable a versatile set of compositional editing capabil-ities, including substitution, addition, deletion, and style-preserving resizing of individual object parts. (3) We provide a fully automated data processing pipeline that enables training on large-scale 3D shape datasets, and does not require manual part-level segmentations or text annota-tions. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that our method significantly outperforms existing approaches on guided synthesis, as measured by objective metrics and LLM-based evaluations. 

2 Related Work 

Controllable Shape Synthesis . The advent of diffusion mod-els [Ho et al . 2020; Peebles and Xie 2023] has significantly advanced the field of 3D shape synthesis. Due to the expansive literature, we refer readers to a recent survey by Wang et al. [2025b]. We review the most representative methods in section 1, where we categorize according to each method’s choice of user guidance. A common thread among these methods is they lack the ability to accept part-separated user guidance, which is a gap we address in our work. 

Part-Aware Shape Synthesis . Early efforts in part-aware synthesis introduced part-disentangled representations for language or sketch-guided generation [Hertz et al . 2022; Koo et al . 2023; Wu et al . 2023a]. However, these pioneering methods were often limited by their reliance on category-specific models and typically produced low-quality geometry. Recent approaches leverage DiT-based diffusion models [Peebles and Xie 2023] to generate part-separated output shapes, starting either from an input 3D mesh [Yang et al . 2025a] or a 2D image [Dong et al . 2025; Lin et al . 2025; Tang et al . 2025; Yang et al. 2025b; Zhang et al. 2025]. While these image-conditioned methods have shown impressive results, their design imposes fundamental limitations on editabil-ity and controllability. First, conditioning on 2D image features — reinjected at every stage of the pipeline — entangles image content with part geometry throughout generation, which globally couples all parts together. As a consequence, resizing, substituting, or iter-ating on individual parts requires re-conditioning on a new image and regenerating the entire shape, rather than manipulating parts independently. Second, the input image is itself typically produced by a 2D diffusion model (e.g., Stable Diffusion), which adds sig-nificant inference overhead and does not natively offer part-level control. A user seeking a specific part arrangement must iterate on their text prompt and repeatedly regenerate the conditioning image until it matches a desired structure, with no guarantee of convergence. Furthermore, image-based conditioning provides no information about occluded or internal geometry, restricting the user to parts visible from a single camera viewpoint. Although some of these methods (e.g., OmniPart [Yang et al . 2025b]) include an intermediate bounding-box stage, the boxes are axis-aligned, not CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:3 

user-controllable, and cannot be used for part-level editing, since im-age features are still reinjected downstream. In contrast, our method accepts user-controlled oriented bounding boxes paired with text prompts as its primary guidance, enabling specification of parts in-visible from any camera angle and supporting compositional editing — resizing, replacing, and deleting parts — while keeping all other parts frozen. Distinct from methods that synthesize geometry directly, meth-ods based on 3D shape programs [Ganeshan et al . 2023; Hu et al .2023; Jones et al . 2020] generate executable code capable of en-forcing structural constraints like symmetry, but are often limited to specific categories and produce lower-fidelity geometry than diffusion-based methods. Our work combines the fine-grained con-trol associated with 3D shape programs, with the high geometric fidelity and cross-category generality of diffusion-based methods. 

3D Shape Editing . A common approach for editing 3D shapes involves leveraging 2D diffusion models, either through per-scene optimization via Score Distillation Sampling [Chen et al . 2024f; Decatur et al . 2024; Dinh et al . 2025; Dong et al . 2024a; Kamata et al . 2023; Liu et al . 2024; Park et al . 2023; Sella et al . 2023; Voleti et al . 2024; Xu et al . 2024; Zhang et al . 2023a; Zhuang et al . 2024, 2023], or by using multi-view diffusion models to generate edits that are then lifted to 3D [Bar-On et al . 2025; Barda et al . 2025; Chen et al . 2024d,c,a; Chi et al . 2025; Erkoç et al . 2025; Haque et al . 2023; Li et al . 2025c; Qi et al . 2024; Vachha and Haque 2024; Wen et al .2025; Wu et al . 2024a]. Another common approach is to directly leverage a 3D diffusion prior and use an existing proxy shape for guidance [Chen et al . 2025c; Dong et al . 2024b; Zhang et al . 2024] while synthesizing geometric details across the entire shape. More recent work has achieved localized editing by leveraging grid-based latent representations [Hyper3D 2024; Li et al . 2025a; Maruani et al .2025; Potamias et al . 2024; Xiang et al . 2024]. However, all of these methods achieve editing through text or image instructions. In contrast, our work provides an intuitive interface where users can resize, replace, and delete individual object parts by manipulating bounding boxes. 

3 Part-Aware Control, Synthesis, and Editing 

Our goal in this section is to design a latent diffusion transformer model that enables compositional synthesis and editing of 3D shapes, where the user’s intent is communicated through a global text prompt describing an object, and a spatial layout of coarse geo-metric primitives (e.g., oriented bounding boxes) describing the arrangement of the object’s individual parts. We proceed by describ-ing a set of technical requirements for our model, a novel problem setting that is motivated by these requirements, and the key design choices that enable our model to meet our stated requirements. 

Technical Requirements . Enabling compositionality in our model imposes several requirements on its design. First, the model must accept coarse geometric primitives (e.g. oriented bounding boxes) that specify the intended structure and part layout. We discuss how we represent and encode these primitives in section 3.2. Second, the model must fuse part-level geometric conditions with a global text prompt so that each synthesized part respects its local geometric   

> Fig. 2. Our problem setting for shape synthesis via part-aware control. We propose to synthesize a 3D shape from a set of coarse geometric primitives (e.g., bounding boxes) arranged in a particular spatial configuration, and a global text prompt. In our problem setting, we do not rely on image inputs or part-level text prompts.

constraints while remaining semantically coherent with the overall description. We discuss how we design our model to handle this information fusion task in section 3.3. Third, the model must sup-port localized editing of individual parts through manipulation of individual geometric primitives at inference time. We discuss our editing procedure in section 3.4. 

Problem Setting . Motivated by the technical requirements in the previous paragraph, we consider the following formal problem set-ting, which we illustrate in fig. 2. Given a conditioning set B =

{𝑏 1, 𝑏 2, . . . , 𝑏 𝑛 } of coarse oriented boxes and a shape-level text prompt 

𝑇 , we want to synthesize separate parts 𝑝 𝑖 for each box in B, such that the synthesized parts P = {𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, . . . , 𝑝 𝑛 } together form a coherent 3D shape aligning with 𝑇 . Formally, we want: 

P = G𝜃 (E B (B), ET (𝑇 )) (1) where G𝜃 is a generative model parameterized by 𝜃 , EB is a learned box encoder that maps each box 𝑏 𝑖 to an appropriate latent represen-tation (see section 3.2), and ET is a pre-trained text encoder [Radford et al. 2021]. 

3.1 Representing 3D Shapes 

Our diffusion model does not learn to denoise 3D triangle meshes directly. Instead, at training time, each ground truth 3D part is first mapped into the TripoSG [Li et al . 2025d] latent space using its pretrained VAE encoder. Given a shape part 𝑝 𝑔𝑡 𝑖 of a ground truth mesh, we first sample points and normals on its surface to obtain the oriented point cloud X𝑔𝑡 𝑖 and compute its latent SDF representation 

z𝑔𝑡 𝑖 using the TripoSG VAE encoder: 

z𝑔𝑡 𝑖 = Vae enc (X𝑔𝑡 𝑖 ), X𝑔𝑡 𝑖 = Sample (𝑝 𝑔𝑡 𝑖 ) (2) These latent codes { z𝑔𝑡 𝑖 } serve as the training targets for our diffu-sion transformer model and constitute the representation in which denoising is performed. During inference, synthesized latent codes are decoded back to SDFs using the TripoSG VAE decoder. 1:4 • Slim et al.   

> Fig. 3. Our diffusion transformer (DiT) architecture for compositional synthesis and editing with part-aware control. Our architecture alternates between local and global stages. Local stages process individual geometric primitives provided by the user; and global blocks aggregate context cues and text information across primitives.

3.2 Representing Coarse Input Geometry 

As we show in section 4, the choice of representation for the user’s input geometry has a significant impact on both synthesis quality and adherence to the provided layout. A naive approach would be to encode each box using an MLP applied directly to its parametric attributes (center, extents, orientation). While conceptually straight-forward, this encoding makes learning unnecessarily difficult, be-cause it forces the model to implicitly learn how low-dimensional box parameters relate to 3D spatial structure, geometry, and part semantics. Instead, we encode each box using the same SDF-based shape encoder that we use for encoding 3D shapes. Concretely, given a box 𝑏 𝑖 , we sample points and normals X𝑖 on its surface and then use the TripoSG VAE encoder to obtain a latent embedding: 

EB (𝑏 𝑖 ) = Vae enc (X𝑖 ), X𝑖 = Sample (𝑏 𝑖 ) (3) This approach has two key advantages: (1) spatial informativeness 

– the SDF representation provides a direct 3D geometric description of the primitive, rather than relying on the model to infer it from parametric cues; and (2) latent-space alignment – the encoded boxes and the encoded shape parts occupy the same latent space, making it easier for the diffusion model to correlate part conditions with the structure of synthesized geometry. Together, these properties lead to significantly improved controllability and alignment with the input layout (see section 4). Furthermore, such a representation is flexible, in the sense that it does not restrict the user’s guidance to a particular class of shapes. 

3.3 Fusing Part Conditioning and Global Context 

A central challenge in our proposed setting is that the user provides only a single global text prompt, yet the model must generate multi-ple parts, each with distinct spatial roles. The model must therefore infer how the global semantics should be distributed across the parts, and how those parts should interact to form a coherent whole. Addressing this challenge requires an architecture capable of rea-soning simultaneously about local structure (i.e., the geometry that should inhabit each individual box) and global structure (i.e., the semantics, proportions, and stylistic relationships that should hold across all parts). Motivated by this challenge, we utilize a unified DiT block that incorporates both text conditioning and primitive conditioning (see fig. 3). Similarly to other works [Wang et al . 2025a; Yang et al . 2025a], we use the same block throughout the network, but we apply it in two distinct modes: a local mode , where the block operates on each part separately; and a global mode , where it operates across all parts jointly. By alternating between these two modes, the architecture learns to balance fine-grained part-level control with global semantic alignment. In local mode, the latent tokens corresponding to a single part are processed in isolation. The DiT block attends only within that part, while being conditioned on the embedding of the corresponding input box and on the shared text embedding. This stage allows the model to integrate the part’s spatial extent with the global semantics, effectively learning which elements of the text description pertain to that specific region of the shape. In global mode, the DiT block operates on the full set of part la-tents simultaneously. Here, the primitive conditioning is no longer tied to a single box; instead, the model is conditioned on the embed-ding of the minimal oriented bounding box that encloses all input primitives. Combined with full attention across all part tokens, this stage allows the model to enforce coherence across parts, harmonize global proportions, and ensure that the synthesized parts express a consistent interpretation of the text prompt. 

3.4 Part-Aware Editing 

When performing part-aware editing operations (see fig. 6), we freeze part latents to control which parts are updated and which parts are preserved. Specifically, when a user edits only a subset of parts, we freeze the latents of all other parts by restoring their latents from the reference shape (i.e., the shape that has been synthesized by our model prior to any editing operations) at every diffusion time step. This technique effectively locks the unedited parts in place, in the sense that they contribute to global consistency of the edited shapes, but do not themselves change their geometry or semantics. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:5   

> Fig. 4. Dataset Processing Pipeline. We illustrate our fully automated dataset processing pipeline that converts raw 3D meshes from the 3D asset datasets into part-segmented shapes with corresponding text-layout pairs for training. Layouts are composed of oriented bounding boxes (OBBs) computed for each part segment. Text captions are generated using the InternVL3-8B [Chen et al. 2024e] vision-language model and focus on geometric and part properties.

In cases where the user wants to edit the geometry of a part while preserving its style and overall appearance, such as rescaling a part (fig. 6 rows 3-5), latent freezing is not sufficient. To enable this type of appearance-preserving edit, we use a KV reinjection 

technique [Avrahami et al . 2025; Bhat et al . 2024; Khachatryan et al .2023]. Specifically, during our model’s forward pass for the reference shape, we cache the attention keys and values produced in the input attention layer and the text attention layer of every DiT block, and at every diffusion time-step. Then, during editing, we recompute keys and values from the modified latents, but we blend them with the cached keys and values in a time-step-dependent manner. This weighted reinjection anchors the part’s visual identity, ensuring that changes to the part’s corresponding geometric primitive (e.g., rescaling) do not cause the appearance of the part to drift (fig. 6 rows 3-5). As shown in fig. 6, our method yields rescaled parts whose style, texture, and geometric character remain faithful to the reference shape. Together, part-latent freezing and KV-reinjection provide a uni-fied and flexible editing framework. Latent freezing controls where 

the edit occurs, while KV-reinjection controls how much of the original identity should be preserved. This combination enables expressive operations: adding and deleting parts, substituting them through text prompts, or performing identity-preserving geometric adjustments, all while maintaining global coherence and respecting the user-specified layout. 

3.5 Dataset Creation 

There is no off-the-shelf dataset consisting of part-segmented shapes, bounding box layouts, and corresponding text captions that is suit-able for our purposes, so we create one by applying a novel fully automated data processing pipeline to Objaverse [Deitke et al . 2023]-sourced samples. In our second training stage, we also process a mix of pre-segmented samples from various sources [Hunyuan3D et al . 2026; Li et al . 2022; Slim et al . 2023] using the same pipeline to increase the diversity of our training data. We illustrate our process-ing pipeline in fig. 4. Our pipeline consists of the following stages: 

Initial Segmentation . We begin by decomposing each raw 3D mesh into an initial set of low-level segments, which we will merge into semantically meaningful part instances in our next stage. We use the geometrically disconnected components of the mesh as our initial set of segments. We note that the Objaverse GLTF files already contain an artist-defined hierarchy of segments, so we could use these segments as our initial set of segments to merge. However, we found that the artist-defined segments in Objaverse can be spa-tially incoherent within an object, and inconsistent across objects, so we choose to discard them which we refer to as GLTF flattening .We then center each mesh at the object-space origin and scale it uniformly so that its longest dimension fits within a unit cube, in a process we refer to as normalization . Afterwards, we apply an auto-merging step to fuse segments with planar geometries and negligible volumes with their largest intersecting segment, and we re-normalize. 

Progressive Segment Merging . To obtain semantically meaning-ful parts from our initial segments, we use a progressive merging strategy guided by segment volume. In each iteration, we identify the smallest segments and, for each one, tag it to be merged with its largest connected neighbor. All tagged merges are then executed in a single pass (per iteration). This iterative procedure continues until the number of segments for the shape is within a target range. 

Heuristic Object Filtering . To ensure the quality of our training data, we discard unsuitable objects using a series of heuristics. We filter out shapes with poor part segmentation quality based on three criteria: (1) the volume ratios between the largest part and the rest of the parts; (2) the average intersection-over-union (IoU) between parts; and (3) the total number of connected components per part mesh. We use empirically tuned thresholds for the first two criteria, and simply discard shapes with any part containing more than one connected component to ensure clean part instances. 

Oriented Bounding Box Extraction . Once we have obtained se-mantically meaningful parts, we generate a spatial layout of coarse geometric control shapes that will guide our synthesis method. For each part, we compute its minimum oriented bounding box (OBB) using an efficient implementation [Zhou et al . 2018] of the exact minimum bounding box algorithm described by Jylanki [2015]. 

Text Caption Generation . The final component of our training data is the global text prompt. To generate a high-quality caption 1:6 • Slim et al. 

for each processed object, we render images of the complete ob-ject, and we feed these images to the powerful InternVL3-8B [Chen et al . 2024e] vision-language model. We use collages of four views arranged in a 2 ×2 grid to provide sufficient context for caption gen-eration. We employ a prompt that encourages captions focusing on geometry and part descriptions, avoiding color and texture which are not relevant to our synthesis task. This process provides a clean and descriptive text prompt that is grounded to the final geometry. 

3.6 Inference Details 

CFG Control Annealing . We employ classifier-free guidance (CFG) [Ho and Salimans 2022] for improved sampling quality. However, we find that applying layout conditioning when using CFG requires special care. In particular, in the dual cross-attention mechanism of our layout control DiT blocks, setting the layout encoder weight near zero for negative samples causes excessive bounding-box con-ditioning, whereas a weight of one degrades output quality. We highlight this point further in section F.2. Our solution is to anneal the bounding-box conditioning strength using an exponential decay throughout the denoising process for negative CFG samples, which substantially improves visual quality. We demonstrate this effect through ablation studies in table 2 and qualitative examples in the appendix, alongside additional details on implementation. 

Layout Optimization and Artifact Filtering . Due to our method operating in the latent space of a VAE, conversions to and from 3D are subject to reconstruction errors. And since we also encode our geometric controls through the VAE, these reconstruction errors distort the conditioning signal, which can cause the synthesized parts to misalign slightly with the input layout. Fortunately, in our work, we know the desired 3D location of each part at inference time, and this information allows us to mitigate layout misalign-ment. In particular, we implement a simple beam search algorithm designed to optimize a similarity transformation matrix applied to our entire synthesized 3D shape. This additional step enables us to find configurations that maximize layout consistency without affecting geometric fidelity. Furthermore, Tang et al. [Tang et al .2025] have identified challenges in using pre-trained VAEs to en-code individual 3D parts. Most modern VAEs are trained on entire shapes, which are scale-normalized and oriented consistently be-fore encoding. Attempting to encode individual 3D parts without such pre-processing during fine-tuning can result in a significant distribution mismatch between pre-training and fine-tuning stages, and can ultimately lead to visual artifacts at inference time. Again, knowing the desired 3D location of each part allows us to easily filter such artifacts if they occur. 

4 Experiments 

We evaluate our proposed method on part layouts and prompt pairs unseen during training, extracted from the Objaverse [Deitke et al .2023] dataset, following the preprocessing pipeline described in sec-tion 3.5. 

4.1 Compositional Synthesis and Editing 

Synthesis . In fig. 5, we show diverse shape generations for given target layouts and text prompts, where we demonstrate strong align-ment between our generated shapes and the provided layout con-straints and prompts. As shown in the top rows of fig. 5, our method successfully generates varied objects, such that synthesized parts clearly correspond to the input bounding boxes and the overall structure matches the user’s intent. 

Editing . In fig. 6, we demonstrate our method’s versatility through diverse editing operations. In the first two rows, we showcase edit sequences starting from a base shape: we iteratively add parts by creating boxes or substituting them by rescaling without style preser-vation. In the following three rows, we show examples of identity-preserving edits , where we rescale parts while preserving their geo-metric identity, as described in section 3.4. We compare our method with anisotropic scaling and provide quantitative evaluation in ta-ble 4. Finally, the last row showcases text-based part editing : mod-ifying the text prompt while keeping the part layout fixed yields localized edits that preserve the shape’s overall structure and style, unlike the global text-driven edits shown in the middle of the last row. 

4.2 Comparisons 

Metrics . We evaluate generation quality and controllability using several metrics. To measure visual quality, we compute the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [Heusel et al . 2017; Szegedy et al . 2015] on rendered normal maps at both the whole-object level ( Object-FID )and for individual, normalized parts ( Part-FID ). Spatial alignment is quantified by Intersection-over-Union (IoU) [Jylanki 2015]. Object-IoU measures the overlap between the generated object’s bounding box and the union of all control boxes, while Part-IoU averages this at the individual part level. We also report Voxel-IoU on a 64 3

grid, which is useful for evaluating baselines that do not produce part segmentations. Finally, to measure text-shape alignment, we compute the CLIP-Score [Hessel et al . 2021; Radford et al . 2021] between the input prompt and rendered views. 

Baselines . To our knowledge, there is no prior work that accepts granular part-based controls in combination with text prompts as we do. The closest works accept coarse (non-part-separated) shape guid-ance: Spice-E [Sella et al . 2024] (diffusion structural guidance), Fanta-sia3D [Chen et al . 2023] (SDS initialization), and Coin3D [Dong et al .2024b] combined with ControlNet [Zhang et al . 2023c] (proxy mesh conditioning). We additionally compare to SpaceControl [Fedele et al . 2026], which accepts superquadric conditioning by instantiat-ing one superquadric per control box, and which we evaluate across multiple classifier-free guidance scales 𝜔 ∈ { 3, 6, 7.5, 9} as well as a variant augmented with image conditioning via ControlNet [Zhang et al . 2023c]. Since Fantasia3D, Coin3D, and Spice-E do not syn-thesize decomposed parts, we only evaluate object-level metrics for these baselines; additionally, since Spice-E is finetuned only on Chair, Table, and Plane categories, we evaluate it on a filtered subset of these categories. We report two variants of our method in table 1: Ours 512 , trained at a token resolution of 512, and Ours 2048 ,a scaled-up version trained on a larger dataset mix with a higher to-ken resolution of 2048. Coin3D fails on roughly 10% of test instances CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:7 

Fig. 5. Part-Controlled Synthesis. We demonstrate our method’s ability to generate diverse shapes that satisfy part layout constraints while matching input text prompts. We showcase multiple generations for various prompt-layout pairs (first two rows) using our largest resolution model, followed by variations in text prompts for a fixed layout (third row). Finally, we compare our method to various guidance-based methods (bottom three rows). We provide baselines with the same coarse guidance shape and text prompt as our method. 1:8 • Slim et al. 

Fig. 6. Part-Level Editing. We demonstrate our method’s versatility through diverse editing operations. In the first two rows, we showcase edit sequences starting from a base shape. We iteratively add parts by creating new boxes, delete them, or substitute them by rescaling without style preservation. In the following three rows, we show examples of identity-preserving edits, where we rescale parts while preserving their geometric identity, as described in section 3.4. We compare our method with Anisotropic Scaling and add quantitative evaluation in table 4. Finally, the last row showcases text-based part editing: modifying the text prompt while keeping the part layout fixed yields localized edits that preserve the shape’s overall structure and style, unlike the global text-driven edits shown in the middle of the last row. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:9 

Table 1. Guided Synthesis on Objaverse . We compare our method with Fantasia3D [Chen et al . 2023], Coin3D [Dong et al . 2024b] + ControlNet [Zhang et al .2023c] (CN), Spice-E [Sella et al . 2024], and SpaceControl, which all support open vocabulary text-to-3D guided synthesis similarly to ours. For SpaceControl, we report results across multiple classifier-free guidance (CFG) scales, denoted by 𝜔 , including a variant with image conditioning via ControlNet (CN) [Zhang et al . 2023c]. †Spice-E evaluation was computed on a smaller subset containing only table, chair, and airplane categories, since it only supports these classes. 

FID ↓ IoU ↑ CLIP ↑

Method Paradigm Conditioning Object Part Object Voxel Part Fantasia3D [Chen et al. 2023] ICCV’23 SDS [Poole et al. 2023] Proxy Mesh 77.64 q 0.259 0.164 q 27.22 Coin3D [Dong et al. 2024b] SIGGRAPH’24 SDS [Poole et al. 2023] Proxy Mesh 95.14 q 0.168 0.095 q 25.10 Spice-E [Sella et al. 2024] SIGGRAPH’24 † Neural Field Diff. [Jun and Nichol 2023] Proxy Mesh 90.30 q 0.640 0.237 q 26.40 SpaceControl [Fedele et al. 2026] ICLR’26 Structured Latents [Xiang et al. 2024]  

> 𝜔 =3

Superquadrics 42.96 q 0.807 0.776 q 26.73  

> 𝜔 =6

Superquadrics 40.20 q 0.794 0.761 q 26.83  

> 𝜔 =7.5

Superquadrics 39.27 q 0.790 0.750 q 26.86  

> 𝜔 =9

Superquadrics 38.26 q 0.785 0.751 q 26.93   

> 𝜔 =7.5 + CN [Zhang et al. 2023c]

Superquadrics + Image 39.55 q 0.785 0.754 q 26.77 

Ours 512 VecSet [Zhang et al. 2023d] Part Layout (Fig. 2) 14.40 19.70 0.804 0.438 0.805 31.57 Ours 2048 12.77 14.41 0.823 0.330 0.840 31.07 

Table 2. Ablation study. We ablate various components including choice of part-control encoders, classifier-free guidance (CFG) annealing, layout optimization, and token resolution.                              

> Layout Encoding
> (Sec. 3.2)
> CFG Anneal.
> (Sec. 3.6)
> Opt.
> (Supp.)
> Token Res. Object-FID
> ↓
> Part-FID
> ↓
> Part-IoU
> ↑
> Parametric 512 20.17 20.14 0.289 DGCNN 512 38.58 43.10 0.008 SDF 512 19.32 21.87 0.729 SDF ✓512 14.44 19.38 0.740 SDF ✓✓512 14.40 19.70 0.805 SDF ✓✓2048 12.77 14.41 0.840

Table 3. GPT-Evaluation on Objaverse . We evaluate baselines by prompt-ing GPT-4o to rank shuffled grid images along four axes (Layout and Prompt Adherence, Quality, Geometry); we report mean ranks over 𝑁 = 100 runs (lower is better ↓), with Overall averaging the four axes. 

Method Layout ↓ Prompt ↓ Quality ↓ Geometry ↓ Overall ↓

Fantasia3D 3.13 3.73 3.37 3.33 3.39 Spice-E 3.35 3.04 3.16 3.07 3.15 Coin3D 4.03 3.87 4.18 4.18 4.06 SpaceControl 3.05 2.20 2.80 2.77 2.70 

Ours 2048 1.43 2.17 1.50 1.65 1.69 

Table 4. Identity-Preservation under Part Rescaling. We measure how faithfully each baseline preserves a part’s geometry after rescaling its bound-ing box, reporting F-Score at 𝜏 ∈ { 0.01 , 0.02 , 0.05 } (↑) against the original part. 

Method F@0.01 ↑ F@0.02 ↑ F@0.05 ↑

Anisotropic Scaling 0.23 0.38 0.55 Part Substitution 0.26 0.46 0.64 

Identity-Preserving 0.38 0.58 0.70 

despite using the hyperparameters recommended by its authors; these failures are excluded from its reported metrics. As shown in table 1, our method outperforms all baselines by a large margin across nearly all metrics. Our Ours 2048 variant achieves the best Object-FID (12.77) and Part-FID (14.41), indicating supe-rior visual quality at both the object and part level. It also obtains the highest Object-IoU (0.823) and Part-IoU (0.840), demonstrating strong adherence to the input layout, as well as the best CLIP-Score among the larger models (31.07), with Ours 512 achieving an even higher CLIP-Score of 31.57. The only metric where a baseline leads is Voxel-IoU, where SpaceControl 𝜔 = 3 achieves 0.776. We attribute this to SpaceControl’s tendency to closely conform to the proxy geometry defined by its superquadric conditioning, densely fill-ing the volume boundaries of the proxies rather than synthesizing semantically meaningful part geometry. In contrast, our method synthesizes parts whose actual surfaces may occupy only a fraction of the bounding volume, as is natural for thin or concave geometry (e.g., chair backs, slatted surfaces). We observe a variation of this behavior when tuning the classifier-free guidance scale 𝜔 of Space-Control: increasing 𝜔 improves FID at the cost of IoU, as stronger guidance pushes the model toward more detailed, prompt-aligned geometry that deviates from the dense superquadric volume. We find 𝜔 = 7.5 offers the best trade-off between visual fidelity and layout adherence. These quantitative results are reflected in the qualitative comparisons in the lower part of fig. 5. Our generated shapes consistently exhibit higher quality and better alignment with text prompts when compared to baseline outputs. 

GPT Evaluation . To complement our quantitative metrics with a holistic perceptual assessment, we conduct an automated evaluation using GPT-4o [Hurst et al . 2024] as a judge. This is motivated by prior work demonstrating that large multimodal models are scal-able, human-aligned evaluators for 3D [Maiti et al . 2025; Wu et al .2024b] and vision-language generation [Zhang et al . 2023b]. For each test instance, we compose a grid image showing the layout reference alongside outputs from all baselines, with each candidate assigned a randomly shuffled letter label and colored border to re-move positional bias. We then query GPT-4o [Hurst et al . 2024] 1:10 • Slim et al.      

> Table 5. Inference Time. We compare the average inference time (in sec-onds) of our method with varying number of parts 𝑁 𝑝 , measured on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU.
> †Fantasia3D [Chen et al .2023] being explicitly optimized for multi-GPU inference, we report its timing using 4 H100 GPUs for fairness.

Method Inference Time (sec.) ↓

𝑁 𝑝 = 1 𝑁 𝑝 = 2 𝑁 𝑝 = 4 𝑁 𝑝 = 8

Fantasia3D † 245.7 ± 3.0 q q q

Coin3D 522.6 ± 13.8 q q q

Spice-E 146.2 ± 1.7 q q q

SpaceControl 9.1 ± 4.1 q q q

Ours 512 4.2 ± 0.5 5.9 ± 0.1 10.4 ± 0.1 19.2 ± 0.1 Ours 2048 8.3 ± 0.1 15.5 ± 0.2 31.2 ± 0.2 66.1 ± 0.5 + opt. 1.6 ± 1.8 3.1 ± 2.6 6.2 ± 3.6 12.5 ± 5.1 

with the grid and the original text instruction, asking it to produce a full ranking of all candidates along four axes: Prompt (adherence to the instruction), Layout (agreement with the layout reference), 

Quality (overall realism), and Geometry (geometric detail, with artifacts penalized). The Overall score is the mean across the four axes, with results averaged over 𝑁 = 100 runs with a fresh random letter permutation per run. The results in table 3 show a consistent preference for our method across all four axes, with Ours 2048 achiev-ing the best mean rank in every individual axis, with an average rank of 1.69. This substantial performance gap across all evaluation criteria validates the perceptual advantages of our method. 

4.3 Inference Time 

We evaluate inference time against the baselines on an NVIDIA H100 GPU, with results summarized in table 5. At resolution 512, our method is faster than all baselines at 𝑁 𝑝 = 1 and remains faster than the optimization-based baselines (Fantasia3D, Coin3D, Spice-E) even at 𝑁 𝑝 = 8. At resolution 2048, we match SpaceControl at 𝑁 𝑝 = 1

but our per-part decoding causes us to fall behind as 𝑁 𝑝 grows. Still, inference scales gracefully with 𝑁 𝑝 : from a few seconds to under twenty at resolution 512, and from roughly eight seconds to just over a minute at resolution 2048. The optional layout optimization adds only a few seconds of overhead, scaling from under two seconds at 

𝑁 𝑝 = 1 to about twelve seconds at 𝑁 𝑝 = 8, while keeping the full pipeline faster than the baselines. 

4.4 Identity-Preserving Part Rescaling 

We evaluate identity-preserving resizing, which adjusts a part’s bounding box while preserving geometric identity. We synthesize 70 edited shapes across categories by manually collecting part rescaling operations applied on base shapes synthesized by our method, span-ning multiple object categories. For each edit, we compute F-Score at 𝜏 ∈ { 0.01 , 0.02 , 0.05 } between the resized part and its counterpart in the unedited shape. We compare against two alternatives shar-ing the same target box: Anisotropic Scaling , which stretches the original geometry, and Part Substitution , which regenerates the part from its text prompt without anchoring to the original latent. As shown in table 4, our method achieves the highest F-Score at every threshold (0.38, 0.58, 0.70), substantially outperforming Anisotropic Scaling which distorts fine details, and Part Substitution which is stylistically consistent but geometrically different, consistent with the qualitative results we provide in fig. 6. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

We conduct an ablation study to validate our key design choices, with results summarized in table 2. 

Part Condition Encoding . We compare our SDF-based encoding against (1) Parametric encoding (box parameters via MLP) and (2) a point-based encoder (DGCNN [Wang et al . 2019] on box surface samples, finetuned end-to-end). As noted in section 3.2, reusing the SDF-based VAE for guidance boxes ensures latent-space alignment with shape parts—a choice table 2 shows is critical for geometric fidelity and layout adherence. 

Inference Strategies . CFG-annealing is crucial for visual quality, improving Object-FID from 19.32 to 14.44, while layout optimiza-tion — a test-time refinement step detailed in section F.3 — raises Part-IoU from 0.740 to 0.805 by correcting minor spatial drifts. 

Token Resolution . Scaling per-part tokens from 512 to 2048 clearly improves all metrics, confirming our approach benefits from scale. 

5 Limitations 

Our method has several limitations that motivate future work. First, slight artifacts can appear in synthesized parts due to the out-of-distribution nature of part segments for the VAE, requiring a filtering stage; finetuning the VAE on part-decomposed data could help. Second, physical plausibility is not guaranteed—missing contacts or asymmetries between parts can compromise structural integrity, which could be addressed by finetuning against a stability reward from a physical simulator [Dong et al . 2024c; Pun et al . 2025]. Third, the method is capped at eight parts per shape, as the Part-Global Attention blocks attend to all part latents simultaneously, making further scaling vRAM-intensive. Finally, users must still define input bounding boxes; a text-to-structure model could automate this by suggesting layouts from text prompts. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced CompoSE, the first method to synthesize part sepa-rated 3D shapes from coarse part layouts, thereby enabling localized granular (i.e., compositional) editing of individual object parts. To enable our method, we introduced a new conditioning technique that ensures strong adherence to input part layouts, a diffusion trans-former architecture that fuses part conditioning with global context, and a data processing pipeline that enables training on large 3D shape datasets without requiring manual part-level segmentations or text annotations. We demonstrated that our method enables a versatile set of compositional editing capabilities, including substi-tution, addition, deletion and style-preserving resizing of individual object parts. We also demonstrated that our method significantly outperforms existing approaches on guided synthesis, as measured by objective metrics and LLM-based evaluations. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:11 

We showed how the task of 3D shape synthesis can benefit from rich structured guidance information (i.e., in the form of a part layout) to enable new kinds of intuitive user controls. In the near future, we believe providing generative AI methods with even richer structured guidance information could become part of the standard computer graphics toolbox. Coarse proxy meshes containing ani-mation rigs and physical affordances could be used to synthesize collections of photorealistic and simulation-ready 3D assets. Moving beyond purely 3D content, computer vision methods could infer structured proxy rigs from videos, and those rigs could be used to re-imagine physically grounded variations of the videos. 1:12 • Slim et al. 

# CompoSE: Supplementary Material 

A Release Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 B User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 C GPT-4 Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 D Additional Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 D.1 Edit Chains and Identity-Preserving Edits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 D.2 Controllable Part Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 D.3 Comparison with Controllable Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 E Failure Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 F Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 F.1 Architecture Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 F.2 CFG Control Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 F.3 Layout Optimization and Artifact Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 F.4 Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 G Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 G.1 Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:13 

A Release Statement 

Our code and dataset will be made publicly available upon publication. 

B User Interface 

For the purposes of easily interacting with our method, we have developed a simple user interface (UI) that allows users to input text prompts and define part layouts by manipulating boxes, using the Streamlit framework 1. The UI provides direct feedback on the generated 3D shapes, enabling users to visualize and refine their designs interactively. We show the interface we have developed in fig. 7. 

Fig. 7. CompoSE User Interface. Our user interface allows users to input text prompts and define part layouts using bounding boxes. We show the layout editor and the output visualizer (top), and the parameter panel (bottom) for fine-tuning generation settings.   

> 1https://streamlit.io/ 1:14 •Slim et al.

C GPT-4 Evaluation 

We provide the complete prompts used for our GPT-4 evaluation in fig. 9 of the supplementary material, alongside samples of the image grids shown to GPT-4 for evaluation in fig. 8. 

Fig. 8. Generated Grids for GPT-4o Ranking. We show samples of the image grids shown to GPT-4o for evaluation, which contain side-by-side comparisons of our method and the baselines for each of the three tasks (guided synthesis, part substitution, part addition). The position of each method is randomized across samples to avoid biasing evaluations based on spatial location. When a method fails (top-left), we replace the corresponding image with a white tile. 

GPT-4 Evaluation Prompt 

The leftmost tile is the LAYOUT REFERENCE. The remaining tiles are 3D shape candidates, each labeled with a large colored letter below the image. Rank ALL candidates from best to worst for each question, as a comma-separated list of letters (e.g. "B,A,D,C,E"). 

Q1: Rank the 3D shapes by how well they follow the instruction: [{instruction}] 

Q2: Given the instruction, rank the 3D shapes by how well they match the layout reference. 

Q3: Rank the 3D shapes by realism and quality (taking into account the intended instruction). 

Q4: Rank the 3D shapes by quality of geometric detail (artifacts, noise ranked lower — intricate details ranked higher). Reply ONLY with a JSON object of the form {"1": "B,A,D,C,E", "2": "A,B,C,D,E", "3": "C,A,B,E,D", "4": "D,B,A,E,C"}, with no extra text, no markdown, no code fences. Every candidate letter must appear exactly once in each ranking. 

Fig. 9. Prompt provided to GPT-4 for evaluating 3D shape candidates against a layout reference. GPT-4 is asked to produce four rankings: instruction adherence (Q1), layout consistency (Q2), overall realism (Q3), and geometric detail quality (Q4). The model is constrained to respond with a strict JSON object containing all candidate letters exactly once per ranking. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:15 

D Additional Samples D.1 Edit Chains and Identity-Preserving Edits 1:16 • Slim et al. 

D.2 Controllable Part Synthesis CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:17 1:18 • Slim et al. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:19 

D.3 Comparison with Controllable Baselines 1:20 • Slim et al. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:21 1:22 • Slim et al. 

E Failure Cases 

While our method achieves strong results across a wide range of inputs, we observe a few characteristic failure modes, illustrated in fig. 10. The most common artifacts are mild z-fighting along the boundaries between adjacent parts, which arises when neighboring part surfaces are generated in close spatial proximity without explicit awareness of one another. We also occasionally observe awkward part geometries in cases with complex, highly-overlapping layouts, where the model must reconcile a large number of competing spatial constraints within a small region. Importantly, these issues are localized and do not compromise the overall structural coherence or semantic alignment of the generated shapes, and we expect them to be straightforward to address in future work through improved cross-part consistency mechanisms or light post-processing.   

> Fig. 10. Failure Case Examples. We highlight a few failure cases of our method, which mostly include z-fighting artifacts between parts, and awkward part geometries especially prevalent in complex, highly-overlapping layouts.

CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:23 

F Implementation Details F.1 Architecture Details 

We provide a complete architecture diagram of our CompoSE model in fig. 11, illustrating the flow from the part-control and layout encoders, through the cross-attention fusion blocks, to the decoder that produces the final output. Text prompt String Timestep t Scalar Noisy latent x_t (N, 2048, 64) Object SDF Grid samples Part SDFs Grid samples CLIP encoder (N, 77, 768) Time MLP (N, 1, 2048) proj_in Linear 64 → 2048 SDF BB encoder (shared, frozen VAE) VAE.encode n=512 → Linear 64 → 1024 text_embeds c = 768 temb (1 token) c = 2048 x' (2048 tokens) c = 2048 object_bb_emb (N, 512, 1024) part_bb_emb (N, 512, 1024) Concat([temb, x']) + part_embedding h_0 ∈ (N, 2049, 2048) 

to cross-attn 1 (every block) 

to cross-attn 2 (global blocks) 

to cross-attn 2 (local blocks) 

L0 · global L1 · local L2 · global L3 · local L4 · global L5 · local L6 · global L7 · local L8 · global L9 · local L20 · global L19 · local L18 · global L17 · local L16 · global L15 · local L14 · global L13 · local L12 · global L11 · local 10 U-Net skip connections L10 · global Bottleneck 

After L20 LayerNorm + drop temb token Keep last 2048 tokens proj_out Linear 2048 → 64 Predicted noise ε

(N, 2048, 64) Legend Input / output / artifact Trainable encoder / projection Frozen pretrained encoder Global DiT block (even) Local DiT block (odd) Skip / conditioning route 

Fig. 11. Complete Architecture Diagram for the CompoSE transformer. We provide a complete architecture diagram for our CompoSE model, showing the part-control encoder, the layout encoder, the cross-attention fusion blocks, and the decoder. 1:24 • Slim et al. 

F.2 CFG Control Annealing 

In this section, we provide additional details regarding the annealing schedule used for classifier-free guidance (CFG) control during inference, as described in the main paper. 

CFG . We use classifier-free guidance to enhance the diversity and quality of the generated parts. Specifically, the negative prompt "Low-poly, minimal, blocky" is used during inference to discourage overly simplistic shapes. We use a CFG scale of 6.5 for all of our experiments, as we find that this value provides a good balance between text and layout adherence and shape quality. 

Control Annealing . Our proposed CFG Control Annealing (CFGCA) is applied as a layer-wise multiplicative decay of the layout control strength 𝛼 𝑐 during the denoising process, only for negative CFG samples. For positive samples, using 𝛼 𝑐 = 0

leads to poor layout adherence. For negative samples, when using 𝛼 𝑐 = 0 throughout the denoising process, synthesized shapes tend to be square-like or boxy. We illustrate this effect in fig. 12. This is because negative CFG samples, being unconditioned on layout, are spatially unrestricted. Classifier-Free Guidance then overcorrects by forcing the generated shape to conform tightly to the layout boundaries, resulting in box-like geometries. Instead, by gradually reducing the layout control strength for negative samples, we push our model to strongly adhere to the layout in the later denoising steps, while allowing more freedom in the earlier steps for enhanced diversity and shape quality. 

Qualitative ablation . We provide additional qualitative results demonstrating the effect of varying the CFG scale during inference. We sample shapes starting from the same layout, text prompt and initial noise latent, and show multiple generations with and without control annealing. In all of our experiments, we use a layer-wise control decay factor of 𝛽 = 0.99 . The results are shown in fig. 13. Overall, we observe that CFGCA helps produce shapes of higher quality without geometric artifacts, while still adhering well to the input layout. These observations confirm the quantitative results presented in the main paper.         

> Fig. 12. Removing Control Guidance for Negative Samples. We illustrate the effect of completely removing layout control for the negative CFG samples during inference (that is, setting 𝛼 𝑐 =0for negative samples throughout the denoising process). Without any layout control on negative samples (left), the synthesized shapes tend to exhibit square-like geometries. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control •1:25

Fig. 13. Effects of CFG Control Annealing. We illustrate the effect of annealing the layout control strength during inference for the negative CFG samples. Without annealing, synthesized samples can exhibit undesirable artifacts (left). With our proposed CFG Control Annealing (right), the generated shapes display higher quality geometry more consistently. This is especially noticeable in samples containing regular geometric patterns (e.g. backrest slats, dental braces). 1:26 • Slim et al. 

F.3 Layout Optimization and Artifact Filtering   

> Fig. 14. Effects of Layout Optimization on Part-IoU. We plot the effects of our layout optimization and artifact filtering described in the main paper. We sort shapes by increasing average part-IoU (left to right). We plot the average part-IoU before (gray) and after (blue) layout optimization. For the shapes in the bottom 10% of most misaligned shapes, we gain an improvement of around 28% in part-IoU after optimization. These gains decrease to around 9% for the top 50% best-aligned shapes, showing that our optimization is mostly beneficial for poorly aligned shapes.

In this section, we provide additional details regarding the layout optimization and artifact filtering strategies mentioned in the main paper. 

Misalignment . Due to our synthesis method operating in latent space, and the fact that our layout controls are also encoded into latent features, encoding/decoding inaccuracies can lead to misalignments between the generated shapes and the input part controls. To mitigate these effects, we implement a simple beam search-based layout optimization procedure during inference, as described in the main paper. We optimize a shape-preserving transformation (similarity transformation) of the input layout to maximize the part-IoU between the generated parts and the transformed layout. Note that this optimization is performed without any alteration of the synthesized geometry. 

Artifacts . Furthermore, some generated parts may exhibit artifacts such as floating geometry or disconnected fragments. This is mainly due to the distribution shift between the training data of the VAE, which is mainly composed of normalized and centered holistic shapes, and our finetuning data, which consists of unnormalized part segments. Previous works [Lin et al . 2025] have also observed similar artifacts when using pre-trained VAEs for part-based reconstruction, and proposed to completely retrain a VAE on a large dataset of part segments to mitigate this issue. However, this approach is computationally prohibitive and requires access to a large dataset of parts. In our case, having access to ground-truth part layouts and focusing on part instances allows us to implement a simple artifact filtering strategy based on part-IoU scores. Specifically, since our model generates part instances as single connected components tightly fitting within the input bounding box, mesh components appearing outside their corresponding control boxes are highly likely to be artifacts. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:27 

Using this fact, we: 

• decompose each synthesized part mesh into its connected components, and only consider parts with more than one component as candidates for artifact removal. 

• identify the largest connected component of each part, and compute its IoU with the input bounding box. 

• if the part-IoU is above a fixed threshold, we discard all other components and retain only the largest one. This simple filtering strategy effectively removes floating artifacts in almost all cases, without requiring retraining of the VAE. We illustrate qualitative results of our layout optimization and artifact filtering in fig. 15. 

Fig. 15. Effects of Layout Optimization on Part-IoU. We sample from the shapes most misaligned before optimization to illustrate the effects of our method. Before filtering, some parts exhibit floating geometry or disconnected fragments (middle, circled). These artifacts are especially prevalent in parts with flat or thin geometries (e.g. tabletops, planes). After optimization and filtering, the parts better fit their input bounding boxes, and artifacts are removed consistently (right). Importantly, this process does not affect the initial geometry. 1:28 • Slim et al. 

F.4 Training Details 

First stage . We train our model end-to-end with a standard rectified flow loss [Liu et al . 2022]. During training, we use a mix of simple objects (consisting of few parts) and complex ones (consisting of many parts) to improve the generalization ability of our method. Our base model is trained on 68k monolithic shapes and 23k multi-part samples from Objaverse [Deitke et al .2023], for a total of 92k objects and 170k unique parts. Importantly, we do not use additional supervision such as part-level text prompts during training. We train this base model for 90k steps with a batch size of 128 distributed over 8 ×A100 GPUs, which takes approximately two weeks. We use the AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter 2019] optimizer with a learning rate of 

5𝑒 −5, a weight decay of 0.01, and 𝜖 = 1𝑒 − 8. We clone the weights of a pre-trained TripoSG DiT [Li et al . 2025d] model for initialization, and modify the DiT blocks to allow for layout conditioning as described in the main paper. Training batches are composed of shape instances sampled randomly from our dataset, in a way that ensures that the total number of parts per batch is equal to our selected batch size. We keep a fixed 15% of training shapes to be monolithic shapes (i.e. with a single part) to minimize forgetting of the base capabilities. We train using 𝐷 = 512 tokens to represent each part latent, but this can be scaled up at inference time as needed. Training using a larger number of tokens could lead to improved shape quality given access to a larger training budget. 

Second stage . For the higher token resolution variant with 𝐷 = 2048 tokens, we fine-tune the model for an additional 26k steps on an expanded dataset mix combining Objaverse [Deitke et al . 2023], 3DCoMPaT [Li et al . 2022; Slim et al . 2023], and HY3DBench [Hunyuan3D et al . 2026] samples, all pre-processed with the pipeline described in fig. 4 combining for a total of 

219k unique shapes and 1.39M parts. For 3DCoMPaT and HY3DBench, we use the labelled part segments as initial proposals for our merging stage as we find that they are of sufficiently high quality. Finally, we select a further 43k high-quality multi-part samples from the resulting dataset mix to fine-tune the model for an additional 2k steps, using heuristics based on inter-part IoU. This second training stage takes approximately one week on 8 ×H100 GPUs. 

Inference . We use classifier-free diffusion guidance (CFG [Ho and Salimans 2022]) during inference, with a CFG scale of 6.5 for all of our experiments. We employ the negative prompt "Low-poly, minimal, blocky" to discourage overly simplistic shapes. Additionally, we use Temporal Score Rescaling [Xu et al . 2025] with a scale of 𝑘 = 0.98 to further enhance shape detail. For all of our experiments, we use 50 denoising steps with the sampler introduced in Stable Diffusion 3 [Esser et al . 2024]. Mesh extraction is performed using Marching Cubes [Lorensen and Cline 1987]. We perform inference with CFG Control Annealing (CFGCA) as described in section F.2 of the supplementary, with a layer-wise decay factor of 𝛽 = 0.99 .CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:29 

G Dataset 

Our main first-stage dataset is derived from the Objaverse [Deitke et al . 2023] collection through a fully automated pipeline designed to produce part-segmented shapes and their corresponding text-layout pairs without any manual effort. 

G.1 Statistics 

Fig. 16. Dataset Statistics. We plot the distribution of mean part-IoU (top), largest-to-rest part volume ratio (middle), and number of parts per shape (bottom) in our processed dataset. Frequencies for mean part-IoU and largest-to-rest part volume ratio are shown on a logarithmic scale to better visualize the long tails of the distributions. For the first two plots, we also show in red our cutoff thresholds used for heuristic filtering during dataset processing. 

We plot the distribution of mean part-IoU, largest-to-rest part volume ratio, and number of parts per shape in our processed dataset in fig. 16. Alongside the distributions of mean part-IoU and largest-to-rest part volume ratio, we also plot the cutoff 1:30 • Slim et al. 

thresholds used for heuristic filtering during dataset processing in red. These cutoffs are selected empirically to remove badly segmented shapes, and more generally poor quality shapes. We use a maximum mean part-IoU of 0.10 and a maximum largest-to-rest part volume ratio of 3. Shapes with a high mean part-IoU are not beneficial to the training of our synthesis model, as their parts are highly overlapping, they do not provide clear geometric cues. Similarly, heavily imbalanced part layouts are also not useful, as they lead to degenerate training samples where a single part occupies a significant portion of the output space. In addition to this filtering, we also discard duplicated shapes, and we filter models based on their caption using a list of keywords to maximize the quality of the geometry extracted. After filtering, our final dataset contains 68k monolithic shapes and 23k multi-part shapes. Monolithic shapes are rebalanced during training to represent 15% of training samples. CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:31 

References 

Maneesh Agrawala. 2023. Unpredictable Black Boxes are Terrible Interfaces. https: //magrawala.substack.com/p/unpredictable-black-boxes-are-terrible. Omri Avrahami, Or Patashnik, Ohad Fried, Egor Nemchinov, Kfir Aberman, Dani Lischinski, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2025. Stable flow: Vital layers for training-free im-age editing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference .7877–7888. Roi Bar-On, Dana Cohen-Bar, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2025. EditP23: 3D Editing via Propagation of Image Prompts to Multi-View. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20652 (2025). Amir Barda, Matheus Gadelha, Vladimir G Kim, Noam Aigerman, Amit H Bermano, and Thibault Groueix. 2025. Instant3dit: Multiview inpainting for fast editing of 3d objects. In CVPR . 16273–16282. Shariq Farooq Bhat, Niloy Mitra, and Peter Wonka. 2024. LOOSECONTROL: Lifting ControlNet for Generalized Depth Conditioning. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers (Denver, CO, USA) (SIGGRAPH ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 102, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/3641519.3657525 Hansheng Chen, Bokui Shen, Yulin Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Linqi Zhou, Connor Z Lin, Jiayuan Gu, Hao Su, Gordon Wetzstein, and Leonidas Guibas. 2024d. 3d-adapter: Geometry-consistent multi-view diffusion for high-quality 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18974 (2024). Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. 2024c. DGE: Direct Gaussian 3D Editing by Consistent Multi-view Editing. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29 – October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part LXXIV 

(Milan, Italy). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 74–92. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-72904-1_5 Minghao Chen, Junyu Xie, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. 2024f. Shap-editor: Instruction-guided latent 3d editing in seconds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 26456–26466. Qimin Chen, Zhiqin Chen, Vladimir G. Kim, Noam Aigerman, Hao Zhang, and Sid-dhartha Chaudhuri. 2025a. DECOLLAGE: 3D Detailization by Controllable, Local-ized, and Learned Geometry Enhancement. In European Conference on Computer Vision .Qimin Chen, Yuezhi Yang, Wang Yifan, Vladimir G. Kim, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Hao Zhang, and Zhiqin Chen. 2025c. ART-DECO: Arbitrary Text Guidance for 3D Detailizer Construction. In SIGGRAPH Asia .Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. 2023. Fantasia3D: Disentangling Geometry and Appearance for High-quality Text-to-3D Content Creation. In ICCV .Yiwen Chen, Zilong Chen, Chi Zhang, Feng Wang, Xiaofeng Yang, Yikai Wang, Zhon-gang Cai, Lei Yang, Huaping Liu, and Guosheng Lin. 2024a. Gaussianeditor: Swift and controllable 3d editing with gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 21476–21485. Yiwen Chen, Tong He, Di Huang, Weicai Ye, Sijin Chen, Jiaxiang Tang, Xin Chen, Zhon-gang Cai, Lei Yang, Gang Yu, Guosheng Lin, and Chi Zhang. 2024b. MeshAnything: Artist-Created Mesh Generation with Autoregressive Transformers. In ICLR .Yiwen Chen, Zhihao Li, Yikai Wang, Hu Zhang, Qin Li, Chi Zhang, and Guosheng Lin. 2025b. Ultra3D: Efficient and High-Fidelity 3D Generation with Part Attention. In 

arXiv .Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al . 2024e. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 24185–24198. Yufeng Chi, Huimin Ma, Kafeng Wang, and Jianmin Li. 2025. DisCo3D: Distilling Multi-View Consistency for 3D Scene Editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01684 

(2025). Dale Decatur, Itai Lang, Kfir Aberman, and Rana Hanocka. 2024. 3d paintbrush: Lo-cal stylization of 3d shapes with cascaded score distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 4473–4483. Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli Vander-Bilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. 2023. Objaverse: A Universe of Annotated 3D Objects. In CVPR .Nam Anh Dinh, Itai Lang, Hyunwoo Kim, Oded Stein, and Rana Hanocka. 2025. Geom-etry in Style: 3D Stylization via Surface Normal Deformation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 28456–28467. Shaocong Dong, Lihe Ding, Xiao Chen, Yaokun Li, Yuxin Wang, Yucheng Wang, Qi Wang, Jaehyeok Kim, Chenjian Gao, Zhanpeng Huang, et al . 2025. From One to More: Contextual Part Latents for 3D Generation. In ICCV .Shaocong Dong, Lihe Ding, Zhanpeng Huang, Zibin Wang, Tianfan Xue, and Dan Xu. 2024a. Interactive3d: Create what you want by interactive 3d generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .4999–5008. Wenqi Dong, Bangbang Yang, Lin Ma, Xiao Liu, Liyuan Cui, Hujun Bao, Yuewen Ma, and Zhaopeng Cui. 2024b. Coin3d: Controllable and interactive 3d assets generation with proxy-guided conditioning. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers . 1–10. Yuan Dong, Qi Zuo, Xiaodong Gu, Weihao Yuan, Zhengyi Zhao, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, and Qixing Huang. 2024c. GPLD3D: Latent Diffusion of 3D Shape Generative Models by Enforcing Geometric and Physical Priors. In CVPR .Slava Elizarov, Ciara Rowles, and Simon Donné. 2025. Geometry Image Diffusion: Fast and Data-Efficient Text-to-3D with Image-Based Surface Representation. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Ziya Erkoç, Can Gümeli, Chaoyang Wang, Matthias Nießner, Angela Dai, Peter Wonka, Hsin-Ying Lee, and Peiye Zhuang. 2025. Preditor3d: Fast and precise 3d shape editing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference .640–649. Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin, Yannik Marek, and Robin Rombach. 2024. Scaling Rectified Flow Transformers for High-Resolution Image Synthesis. Elisabetta Fedele, Francis Engelmann, Ian Huang, Or Litany, Marc Pollefeys, and Leonidas Guibas. 2026. SpaceControl: Introducing Test-Time Spatial Control to 3D Generative Modeling. In ICLR .Aditya Ganeshan, R. Kenny Jones, and Daniel Ritchie. 2023. Improving Unsupervised Visual Program Inference with Code Rewriting Families. In ICCV .Xianfeng Gu, Steven J. Gortler, and Hugues Hoppe. 2002. Geometry Images. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) .Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei A Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2023. Instruct-nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 19740–19750. Xianglong He, Zi-Xin Zou, Chia-Hao Chen, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Chun Yuan, Wanli Ouyang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Yangguang Li. 2025. SparseFlex: High-Resolution and Arbitrary-Topology 3D Shape Modeling. In arXiv .Amir Hertz, Or Perel, Raja Giryes, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2022. Spaghetti: Editing implicit shapes through part aware generation. ACM TOG (2022). Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2021. CLIPScore: A Reference-free Evaluation Metric for Image Captioning. In EMNLP .Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. 2017. GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium. In NeurIPS .HexaGen. 2024. HexaGen | Community creations. https://www.hexagen.ai. Accessed: 2024-11-12. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In NeurIPS .Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. 2022. Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance. Hugues Hoppe. 2004. Overview of Recent Work on Geometry Images. In Proceedings of Geometric Modeling and Processing .Wentao Hu, Jia Zheng, Zixin Zhang, Xiaojun Yuan, Jian Yin, and Zihan Zhou. 2023. PlankAssembly: Robust 3D Reconstruction from Three Orthographic Views with Learnt Shape Programs. In ICCV .Team Hunyuan3D, Bowen Zhang, Chunchao Guo, Dongyuan Guo, Haolin Liu, Hongyu Yan, Huiwen Shi, Jiaao Yu, Jiachen Xu, Jingwei Huang, Kunhong Li, Lifu Wang, Linus, Penghao Wang, Qingxiang Lin, Ruining Tang, Xianghui Yang, Yang Li, Yirui Guan, Yunfei Zhao, Yunhan Yang, Zeqiang Lai, Zhihao Liang, and Zibo Zhao. 2026. HY3D-Bench: Generation of 3D Assets. arXiv:2602.03907 [cs.CV] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al . 2024. GPT-4o System Card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 (2024). Hyper3D. 2024. Rodin AI - Free AI 3D Model Generator For Everyone. https://hyper3d. ai/rodin. Accessed: 2024-11-12. R. Kenny Jones, Theresa Barton, Xianghao Xu, Kai Wang, Ellen Jiang, Paul Guerrero, Niloy J. Mitra, and Daniel Ritchie. 2020. ShapeAssembly: Learning to Generate Programs for 3D Shape Structure Synthesis. ACM TOG (2020). Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. 2023. Shap-E: Generating Conditional 3D Implicit Functions. arXiv:2305.02463 [cs.CV] J Jylanki. 2015. An exact algorithm for finding minimum oriented bounding boxes. 

Semantic Scholar (2015). Hiromichi Kamata, Yuiko Sakuma, Akio Hayakawa, Masato Ishii, and Takuya Narihira. 2023. Instruct 3d-to-3d: Text instruction guided 3d-to-3d conversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15780 (2023). Animesh Karnewar, Andrea Vedaldi, David Novotny, and Niloy J Mitra. 2023. Holodif-fusion: Training a 3D diffusion model using 2D images. In CVPR .Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. 2023. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot video generators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 15954–15964. Juil Koo, Seungwoo Yoo, Minh Hieu Nguyen, and Minhyuk Sung. 2023. Salad: Part-level latent diffusion for 3D shape generation and manipulation. In ICCV .Lin Li, Zehuan Huang, Haoran Feng, Gengxiong Zhuang, Rui Chen, Chunchao Guo, and Lu Sheng. 2025a. Voxhammer: Training-free precise and coherent 3D editing in native 3D space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19247 (2025). Peng Li, Suizhi Ma, Jialiang Chen, Yuan Liu, Congyi Zhang, Wei Xue, Wenhan Luo, Alla Sheffer, Wenping Wang, and Yike Guo. 2025c. Cmd: Controllable multiview diffusion for 3d editing and progressive generation. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group 1:32 • Slim et al. 

on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers . 1–10. Weiyu Li, Jiarui Liu, Hongyu Yan, Rui Chen, Yixun Liang, Xuelin Chen, Ping Tan, and Xiaoxiao Long. 2025b. CraftsMan3D: High-fidelity Mesh Generation with 3D Native Diffusion and Interactive Geometry Refiner. In CVPR .Yuchen Li, Ujjwal Upadhyay, Habib Slim, Ahmed Abdelreheem, Arpit Prajapati, Suhail Pothigara, Peter Wonka, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2022. 3D CoMPaT: Composition of Materials on Parts of 3D Things. In ECCV .Yangguang Li, Yuanbo Yang, Kaicheng Yu, Libo Zhou, Hongsheng Li, Guangming Zhu, Yuzhong Zhao, Peilin Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Lei Zhang. 2025d. TripoSG: High-Fidelity 3D Shape Synthesis using Large-Scale Rectified Flow Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06608 (2025). Yuchen Lin, Chenguo Lin, Panwang Pan, Honglei Yan, Yiqiang Feng, Yadong Mu, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 2025. PartCrafter: Structured 3D Mesh Generation via Compositional Latent Diffusion Transformers. In NeurIPS .Fangfu Liu, Hanyang Wang, Weiliang Chen, Haowen Sun, and Yueqi Duan. 2024. Make-your-3d: Fast and consistent subject-driven 3d content generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 389–406. Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. 2022. Flow Straight and Fast: Learning to Generate and Transfer Data with Rectified Flow. William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. 1987. Marching Cubes: A High Resolution 3D Surface Construction Algorithm. In SIGGRAPH .Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations .Shalini Maiti, Lourdes Agapito, and Filippos Kokkinos. 2025. Gen3DEval: Using vLLMs for Automatic Evaluation of Generated 3D Objects. In CVPR .Nissim Maruani, Wang Yifan, Matthew Fisher, Pierre Alliez, and Mathieu Desbrun. 2025. ShapeShifter: 3D Variations Using Multiscale and Sparse Point-Voxel Diffusion. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 605–617. Meshy AI. 2024. Meshy. https://www.meshy.ai. Accessed: 2024-11-12. Paritosh Mittal, Yen-Chi Cheng, Maneesh Singh, and Shubham Tulsiani. 2022. Autosdf: Shape priors for 3d completion, reconstruction and generation. In CVPR .George Kiyohiro Nakayama, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Jiahui Huang, Shi-Min Hu, Ke Li, and Leonidas Guibas. 2023. Difffacto: Controllable Part-Based 3D Point Cloud Generation with Cross Diffusion. In ICCV .Charlie Nash, Yaroslav Ganin, S. M. Ali Eslami, and Peter Battaglia. 2020. PolyGen: An Autoregressive Generative Model of 3D Meshes. In ICML .Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. 2022. Point-E: A System for Generating 3D Point Clouds from Complex Prompts. In arXiv .Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. 2021. GIRAFFE: Representing scenes as compo-sitional generative neural feature fields. In CVPR .Jangho Park, Gihyun Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. 2023. Ed-nerf: Efficient text-guided editing of 3d scene with latent space nerf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02712 (2023). Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Love-grove. 2019. DeepSDF: Learning Continuous Signed Distance Functions for Shape Representation. In CVPR .William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers. In ICCV .Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. 2023. DreamFusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In ICLR .Rolandos Alexandros Potamias, Michail Tarasiou, Stylianos Ploumpis, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2024. Shapefusion: A 3d diffusion model for localized shape editing. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 72–89. Ava Pun, Kangle Deng, Ruixuan Liu, Deva Ramanan, Changliu Liu, and Jun-Yan Zhu. 2025. Generating Physically Stable and Buildable Brick Structures from Text. In 

ICCV .Zhangyang Qi, Yunhan Yang, Mengchen Zhang, Long Xing, Xiaoyang Wu, Tong Wu, Dahua Lin, Xihui Liu, Jiaqi Wang, and Hengshuang Zhao. 2024. Tailor3d: Cus-tomized 3d assets editing and generation with dual-side images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06191 (2024). Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In ICML .Xuanchi Ren, Jiahui Huang, Xiaohui Zeng, Ken Museth, Sanja Fidler, and Francis Williams. 2024. XCube: Large-Scale 3D Generative Modeling using Sparse Voxel Hierarchies. In CVPR .Foundation AI Team Roblox. 2025. Cube: A Roblox View of 3D Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15475 (2025). Aditya Sanghi, Rao Fu, Vivian Liu, Karl D.D. Willis, Hooman Shayani, Amir H. Khasah-madi, Srinath Sridhar, and Daniel Ritchie. 2023. CLIP-Sculptor: Zero-Shot Generation of High-Fidelity and Diverse Shapes from Natural Language. In CVPR .Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Noam Atia, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. 2024. Spice-E: Struc-tural Priors in 3D Diffusion using Cross-Entity Attention. In SIGGRAPH .Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Peter Hedman, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. 2023. Vox-e: Text-guided voxel editing of 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 430–440. Yawar Siddiqui, Antonio Alliegro, Alexey Artemov, Tatiana Tommasi, Daniele Sirigatti, Vladislav Rosov, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. 2024. MeshGPT: Generating Triangle Meshes with Decoder-Only Transformers. In CVPR .Habib Slim and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2024. ShapeWalk: Compositional Shape Editing through Language-Guided Chains. In CVPR .Habib Slim, Xiang Li, Yuchen Li, Mahmoud Ahmed, Mohamed Ayman, Ujjwal Upadhyay, Ahmed Abdelreheem, Arpit Prajapati, Suhail Pothigara, Peter Wonka, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2023. 3DCoMPaT++: An improved Large-scale 3D Vision Dataset for Compositional Recognition. In arXiv preprint arxiv:2212.11715 .Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. 2015. Going Deeper with Convolutions. In CVPR .Jiaxiang Tang, Ruijie Lu, Zhaoshuo Li, Zekun Hao, Xuan Li, Fangyin Wei, Shuran Song, Gang Zeng, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. 2025. Efficient Part-level 3D Object Generation via Dual Volume Packing. In arXiv .Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. 2024. Hunyuan3D 1.0: A Unified Framework for Text-to-3D and Image-to-3D Generation. arXiv:2411.02293 [cs.CV] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. 2025a. Hunyuan3D 2.0: Scaling Diffusion Models for High Resolution Textured 3D Assets Generation. arXiv:2501.12202 [cs.CV] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. 2025b. Hunyuan3D 2.5: Towards High-Fidelity 3D Assets Generation with Ultimate Details. arXiv:2506.16504 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2506.16504 Cyrus Vachha and Ayaan Haque. 2024. Instruct-GS2GS: Editing 3D Gaussian Splats with Instructions. https://instruct-gs2gs.github.io/ Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All you Need. In 

NeurIPS .Mathias Vogel, Keisuke Tateno, Marc Pollefeys, Federico Tombari, Marie-Julie Rakoto-saona, and Francis Engelmann. 2024. P2p-bridge: Diffusion Bridges for 3D Point Cloud Denoising. In ECCV .Vikram Voleti, Chun-Han Yao, Mark Boss, Adam Letts, David Pankratz, Dmitry Tochilkin, Christian Laforte, Robin Rombach, and Varun Jampani. 2024. Sv3d: Novel multi-view synthesis and 3d generation from a single image using latent video diffusion. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 439–457. Chen Wang, Hao-Yang Peng, Ying-Tian Liu, Jiatao Gu, and Shi-Min Hu. 2025b. Diffusion models for 3D generation: A survey. Computational Visual Media 11, 1 (2025), 1–28. Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotny. 2025a. VGGT: Visual Geometry Grounded Transformer. In 

CVPR .Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M. Solomon. 2019. Dynamic Graph CNN for Learning on Point Clouds. In SIGGRAPH .Minghao Wen, Shengjie Wu, Kangkan Wang, and Dong Liang. 2025. Intergsedit: Interactive 3d gaussian splatting editing with 3d geometry-consistent attention prior. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision .26136–26145. Jing Wu, Jia-Wang Bian, Xinghui Li, Guangrun Wang, Ian Reid, Philip Torr, and Victor Prisacariu. 2024a. GaussCtrl: Multi-View Consistent Text-Driven 3D Gaussian Splatting Editing. ECCV (2024). Lemeng Wu, Dilin Wang, Chengyue Gong, Xingchao Liu, Yunyang Xiong, Rakesh Ranjan, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra, and Qiang Liu. 2023b. Fast Point Cloud Generation with Straight Flows. In CVPR .Tong Wu, Guandao Yang, Zhibing Li, Kai Zhang, Ziwei Liu, Leonidas Guibas, Dahua Lin, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2024b. GPT-4V(ision) is a Human-Aligned Evaluator for Text-to-3D Generation. In CVPR .Zijie Wu, Yaonan Wang, Mingtao Feng, He Xie, and Ajmal Mian. 2023a. Sketch and Text Guided Diffusion Model for Colored Point Cloud Generation. In ICCV .Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. 2024. Structured 3D Latents for Scalable and Versatile 3D Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506 (2024). Teng Xu, Jiamin Chen, Peng Chen, Youjia Zhang, Junqing Yu, and Wei Yang. 2024. Tiger: Text-instructed 3d gaussian retrieval and coherent editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14455 (2024). Yanbo Xu, Yu Wu, Sungjae Park, Zhizhuo Zhou, and Shubham Tulsiani. 2025. Temporal Score Rescaling for Temperature Sampling in Diffusion and Flow Models. Xingguang Yan, Han-Hung Lee, Ziyu Wan, and Angel X Chang. 2025. An Object is Worth 64 × 64 Pixels: Generating 3D Object via Image Diffusion. In 2025 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) .Yunhan Yang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yukun Huang, Zi-Xin Zou, Zhipeng Yu, Yangguang Li, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xihui Liu. 2025a. Holopart: Generative 3D Part Amodal Segmen-tation. In arXiv .Yunhan Yang, Yufan Zhou, Yuan-Chen Guo, Zi-Xin Zou, Yukun Huang, Ying-Tian Liu, Hao Xu, Ding Liang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xihui Liu. 2025b. OmniPart: Part-Aware 3D Generation with Semantic Decoupling and Structural Cohesion. In SIGGRAPH .Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. 2022. LION: Latent Point Diffusion Models for 3D Shape Generation. In NeurIPS .CompoSE: Compositional Synthesis and Editing of 3D Shapes via Part-Aware Control • 1:33 

Biao Zhang, Matthias Niessner, and Peter Wonka. 2022. 3DILG: Irregular Latent Grids for 3D Generative Modeling. In NeurIPS .Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Nießner, and Peter Wonka. 2023d. 3DShape2VecSet: A 3D Shape Representation for Neural Fields and Generative Diffusion Models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (2023). Hao Zhang, Yao Feng, Peter Kulits, Yandong Wen, Justus Thies, and Michael J Black. 2023a. Text-guided generation and editing of compositional 3d avatars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07125 (2023). Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023c. Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In ICCV .Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. 2024. CLAY: A Controllable Large-scale Generative Model for Creating High-quality 3D Assets. In SIGGRAPH .Longwen Zhang, Qixuan Zhang, Haoran Jiang, Yinuo Bai, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. 2025. BANG: Dividing 3D Assets via Generative Exploded Dynamics. In 

SIGGRAPH .Xinlu Zhang, Yujie Lu, Weizhi Wang, An Yan, Jun Yan, Lianke Qin, Heng Wang, Xifeng Yan, William Yang Wang, and Linda Ruth Petzold. 2023b. GPT-4V(ision) as a Gener-alist Evaluator for Vision-Language Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01361 (2023). Qian-Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. 2018. Open3D: A Modern Library for 3D Data Processing. arXiv (2018). Jingyu Zhuang, Di Kang, Yan-Pei Cao, Guanbin Li, Liang Lin, and Ying Shan. 2024. Tip-editor: An accurate 3d editor following both text-prompts and image-prompts. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 43, 4 (2024), 1–12. Jingyu Zhuang, Chen Wang, Liang Lin, Lingjie Liu, and Guanbin Li. 2023. Dreameditor: Text-driven 3d scene editing with neural fields. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers . 1–10.