Title: Extracting Neural Materials from Multi-view Images

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26715v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 00:46:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Extracting Neural Materials from Multi-view Images 

## Kim Youwang 1,2 Jon Hasselgren 1 Peter Kocsis 1

## Andrea Weidlich 1 Tae-Hyun Oh 3 Jacob Munkberg 11NVIDIA 2POSTECH 3KAIST 

Figure 1. NeuMatEx extracts Neural Materials from multi-view images, a richer material representation that goes beyond PBR. Our differentiable inverse rendering method decomposes Lambertian diffuse lobe and “neural” specular lobes for complex real world material-light interactions such as haze , dust , clearcoat , fuzz , scatter , and even their mixtures, while being able to be path-traced in real-time rates. 

## Abstract 

Neural materials can represent complex specular reflections and scattering effects in a compact, universal basis. However, acquiring and authoring such materials remains challeng-ing. We present NeuMatEx, a differentiable inverse render-ing method for extracting spatially varying neural materials from images. The nonlinear structure of neural material latent spaces makes optimization with na ¨ıve inverse render-ing infeasible. To address this, we train a Large Material Reconstruction Model (LMRM) that directly predicts initial base color, neural material latents, and aleatoric uncertainty guides from images. This material prior provides a good ini-tialization and better constrains our subsequent optimization using inverse path tracing. The predicted uncertainty further helps by anchoring high-confidence regions more tightly to the LMRM prediction, preventing lighting and complex spec-ular effects from being baked into materials. Experiments on synthetic and real assets show that NeuMatEx extracts complex materials with better visual quality and material decomposition than PBR-based methods. 

## 1. Introduction 

Authoring materials for 3D objects is a challenging artistic task, which involves creating spatially-varying details and as-signing appropriate material parameters to its different parts. Current interactive applications, e.g ., games, commonly ap-ply a physically-based (PBR) material model, where a mate-rial is defined by diffuse base color, roughness, and metallic-ity stored in spatially varying textures. This allows a large variety of materials, including metals, woods, and plastics, but is still far from the appearance quality in offline render-ing, e.g ., film production, where artists design large material node graphs with multiple layers to capture the real-world appearance of effects like skin, eyes, and car paint. To bridge the gap between offline and real-time material quality, neural material representations [ 10 , 28 , 58 , 60 ] have recently been proposed. The idea is to bake complex material graphs into a compact neural representation, consisting of a set of latent texture maps and a small neural network. This results in a unified format efficiently executable on modern graphics hardware at real-time rates, e.g ., inside a path trac-1

> arXiv:2606.26715v1 [cs.CV] 25 Jun 2026

ing real-time renderer [ 60 ]. Neural materials are typically baked from large material node graphs by densely sampling the 6D space of spatial variation (2D), and incoming and outgoing directions (4D). For each sample, the spatially vary-ing bidirectional reflection/scattering function (SVBSDF) is evaluated and the neural material is optimized to match the reference material’s SVBSDF, as closely as possible. In this work, we ask whether the inverse rendering ma-chinery can be extended to extract neural material repre-sentations, which offer far greater expressiveness. To help asset creation, we introduce the first pipeline to extract neu-ral materials from multi-view images. On a high level, this process can be described as photogrammetry for neural mate-rials, however, the devil is in the details. Many recent works have successfully extracted PBR materials from multi-view images by leveraging inverse rendering and the highly con-strained PBR material representation. Neural materials on the other hand are much more expressive, with additional de-grees of freedom, and the latent space representing the mani-fold of valid materials can be fractured, which require careful initializations for inverse rendering optimization to converge. We address this problem by combining feed-forward recon-struction model priors with differentiable optimization to robustly extract neural materials from images. Specifically, we have constructed a large feed-forward material reconstruction model (LMRM) which produces 1) a high quality initial guess of the neural material from a set of image observations, and 2) uncertainty estimates of the predictions. In a second step, we further refine the mate-rial prediction using Monte-Carlo based inverse rendering, guided by uncertainty. We leverage a recent neural material basis [ 58 ] which focuses on high quality specular appear-ance, including clear-coat, dust, fuzz, and scatter effects (see Fig. 1). Our extracted neural materials can be directly deployed inside a real-time path tracer. We summarize our main contributions as follows: • We introduce the first neural material extraction pipeline combining a pre-trained prior with test-time optimization, going beyond standard PBR representations. • We train an LMRM to estimate neural materials from multi-view images providing good initialization for our subsequent inverse path tracing. • We use uncertainty-based regularization to better constrain inverse path tracing and avoid baked-in effects. 

## 2. Related Work 

Our work targets extracting neural material from images by combining inverse rendering with a large feed-forward reconstruction model. We briefly review the related fields. 

Material extraction from images. A long-standing goal in inverse rendering is to extract spatially varying mate-rials from images of 3D shapes. Several techniques esti-mate surface radiometric properties from images. Previ-ous work on SVBRDF estimation rely on special viewing configurations, lighting patterns or complex capturing se-tups [ 2 , 4, 14 – 16 , 29 , 45 , 53 ]. More recently, optimization-based methods jointly recover PBR texture maps, environ-ment lighting and geometry from casually captured im-ages [ 1, 5, 7, 18 , 34 , 38 , 65 , 66 ] using inverse rendering. Radiance field-based methods factorize scene representa-tions into intrinsic components without relying on explicit geometry [13, 21, 22, 33, 64]. Optimization-based methods are sensitive to ambiguous data and often require well-calibrated observations to reliably disentangle lighting, reflectance, and shape. To overcome this, a plethora of methods rely on neural networks to predict BRDFs from images [ 12 , 17 , 30 , 31 , 36 , 40 ]. Additionally, many recent methods use feed-forward or generative ap-proaches to directly predict material intrinsics in a single forward pass [19, 26, 27, 32, 35, 39, 47, 48, 54, 57, 62]. While the field has advanced substantially, these methods universally target standard PBR material representations, i.e ., a diffuse term paired with a single-lobe specular component, which limits the complexity of the extracted materials. 

Neural materials. Neural material models represent SVB-SDFs using latent textures for spatial variation and neural decoders for directional variation [ 10 , 28 , 60 ]. To improve rendering performance, the decoders are highly optimized MLPs designed around hardware constraints [ 60 ], and the complexity of the compressed latent space typically requires special consideration during optimization [3]. Recent work propose methods for generative neural ma-terials, including models that synthesize neural latents di-rectly or extract them from generative image and video pri-ors [ 43 , 56 , 58 ]. However, the nonlinear neural latent space in these approaches poses a challenging problem [ 58 ], espe-cially with small, highly optimized MLPs targeting real-time deployment. Combining inverse rendering with neural mate-rials remains an under-explored research field. In this work, we note that the latent spaces of recent neural material repre-sentations further exaggerate the problem of optimization-based approaches getting stuck in local minima. 

Relightable neural representations. Several works use neural representations for relighting surface and volumetric assets [ 11 , 37 , 44 , 55 , 61 ]. They typically treat assets as atomic units and precompute light transport, which makes animation, local lighting, and object interaction difficult. For instance, reconstructed objects generally do not support mutual global illumination effects. In addition, asset gener-ation often requires controlled-lighting setups [ 11 , 37 , 55 ], typically with point light sources, complicating real-world data capture. In contrast, our method relies on inverse ren-dering [ 5 , 18 , 38 , 66 ] and explicitly reconstructs the local SVBSDF, making the resulting assets compatible with off-the-shelf animation and light-transport algorithms. 2Figure 2. NeuMatEx consists of two stages. (a) Neural Material Initialization: Given input images and a 3D mesh geometry, a Large Material Reconstruction Model (LMRM) predicts a feature triplane in a single forward pass. The triplane is decoded by two MLPs to jointly predict an initial neural material and per-material uncertainty that reflect ambiguous surface regions. (b) Test-Time Optimization (TTO): 

> We further optimize the initialized triplane via differentiable path tracing supervised by a photometric render loss against the input images. To regularize the ill-posed inverse rendering, uncertainty estimates from (a) are used to guide the TTO, allowing flexible material drifts for uncertain regions and preventing significant material drifts for confident regions, steering the solution away from local minima.

## 3. Overview of NeuMatEx 

In this section, we briefly introduce the Neural Material representation that NeuMatEx builds upon, followed by an overview of the two-stage framework of NeuMatEx. 

Preliminary: Neural Materials (NM). Different from stan-dard PBR materials [ 6 , 24 ] parameterized by explicit maps, 

e.g ., base color, roughness, metallicity, a Neural Material (NM) [ 10 , 28 , 60 ] can represent a richer SVBSDF expressed as a set of latent textures and a small neural network. In this work, we leverage a recent NM representation [ 58 ] which combines a Lambertian diffuse lobe with an expressive neu-ral specular component: 

f (p, ω i, ω o) = Tneu (p, ω i) ρd(p)

π + fneu (p, ω i, ω o), (1) where ρd is the diffuse base color, fneu the specular BSDF, and Tneu the transmission albedo (to enforce energy conser-vation). These values are decoded by a pre-trained universal decoder MLP Dneu :

(fneu , T neu , R neu ) = Dneu (ℓ(p), ω i, ω o), (2) where ℓ(p) ∈ R6 is a per-point specular latent code that compresses 22 analytical parameters [ 58 ] into a compact dif-ferentiable representation, and Rneu (ωi) is a scalar measure of reflected energy in fneu , used for importance sampling be-tween the diffuse and neural specular lobe during rendering. Trained on a large-scale procedurally enhanced NM dataset [ 58 ] spanning diverse multi-lobe specular effects, 

e.g ., clearcoat, inner-/subcutaneous scattering, this NM la-tent space covers significantly richer appearance than PBR’s single GGX lobe. Rendering NM is detailed later in Sec. 5. 

NeuMatEx Pipeline. NeuMatEx consists of two stages (see Fig. 2). In the first stage (Fig. 2a), given multi-view images and the corresponding 3D mesh geometry, a Large Material Reconstruction Model (LMRM) predicts a feature triplane in a single forward pass. Two lightweight MLPs decode this triplane to jointly produce an initial neural material, i.e ., per-point base color and neural specular latents, and a mate-rial uncertainty that flags ambiguous surface regions. In the second stage (Fig. 2b), we perform test-time optimization of the initialized triplane using differentiable neural mate-rial path tracing, regularized by the LMRM’s uncertainty prediction from the first stage: discouraging material drifts for confident regions while letting uncertain ones adapt, to avoid poor local minima. We detail the initialization stage in Sec. 4 and the test-time optimization in Sec. 5. 

## 4. Large Material Reconstruction Model 

We introduce a large feed-forward material reconstruction model (LMRM), that takes multi-view images and jointly predicts 1) a high quality initial guess of the neural material, and 2) uncertainty estimates of the material predictions. 

Model architecture. Following recent work [ 52 , 56 , 63 ], we leverage a pre-trained diffusion transformer (DiT) [ 41 ]for text-to-video, Wan2.1-1.3B [ 50 ], repurposed as a single-step model. We finetune the model to take a set of input views, I, and to output a neural material parameterized in a triplane representation. We note that Mullia et al [ 37 ]also parametrize a neural appearance representation using triplanes. We drop the text conditioning. The model comprises a VAE encoder-decoder pair, 

(EVAE , DVAE ), and a transformer-based denoising function, 3Fθ . We use the encoder EVAE to encode the input image views, I, into a latent tensor, zI. Specifically, we encode 

F = 17 views, evenly spaced in a 360 degree orbit around the object, alongside the six canonical views. The 17 views are encoded using the video VAE, and the canonical views are each encoded with the image VAE for additional qual-ity [ 51 ]. We then run a single step of the transformer-based denoising function, Fθ to produce an output latent, 

ztri (θ) = Fθ (zI). (3) This latent is decoded via the VAE decoder, DVAE , into three triplane features: 

TXY , TYZ , TXZ = DVAE (ˆ ztri (θ)) , (4) representing the XY , YZ , and XZ planes respectively. We query the triplanes at each surface point, p, for each covered pixel in each view. These three point feature ten-sors are then concatenated to form a point feature, which is decoded by two small multi-layered perceptrons (MLPs) sharing the same input: a material decoder, Mmat  

> ϕ

, and an uncertainty decoder, Munc  

> ψ

. By querying triplane features for all the surface points, the material decoder produces G-buffer images of the material parameters for each covered pixel, 

Gmat (p) = Mmat  

> ϕ

([ TXY (p), TYZ (p), TXZ (p)]) , (5) while the uncertainty decoder produces G-buffer images of the per-material uncertainty measure, i.e ., log-variance, 

Gunc (p) = Munc  

> ψ

([ TXY (p), TYZ (p), TXZ (p)]) , (6) over the same material parameters. Note that we train over a large collection of 3D shapes, so both MLPs, Mmat  

> ϕ

and 

Munc  

> ψ

, represent shared, universal decoders of triplane fea-tures, while the predicted triplanes are unique per 3D object. 

Training LMRM. We jointly train the parameters of the LMRM network, θ, and the decoder MLPs ϕ and ψ, by minimizing the training objective: 

L(θ, ϕ, ψ ) = Lmat + λunc Lunc , (7) which combines a material regression loss and an uncertainty loss. The material loss supervises the mean prediction of 

Mmat  

> ϕ

against the reference, i.e ., ground-truth, G-buffers, 

Lmat = EGref   

> mat ∼pdata

∥Gmat (θ, ϕ ) − Gref 

> mat

∥22, (8) where Gref  

> mat

are G-buffer views of the reference material parameters. The uncertainty loss supervises the per-pixel material uncertainties, i.e ., log-variance (Eq. 6), following the β-NLL formulation of Seitzer et al. [46]: 

Lunc =E



⌊exp ( βGunc )⌋

 Gunc 

2 + ∥⌊ Gmat ⌋ − Gref 

> mat

∥22

2 exp( Gunc )

 

,

(9)   

> Figure 3. Why do we need test-time optimization? While our feed-forward prediction gives reasonable initial materials (a), test-time optimization (b) recovers finer details ( top ) and corrects color shifts and material decomposition in challenging cases ( bottom ).

where β = 0 .5 and ⌊·⌋ denotes the stop-gradient operation, applied per material channel. We apply the stop-gradient to the material mean Gmat inside Lunc so that it trains only the uncertainty decoder Munc  

> ψ

, while Lmat trains the mean; we refer to Seitzer et al. [46] for details. We adopt a two-stage training curriculum. We first pre-train LMRM on large-scale 3D shape datasets with annotated PBR materials [ 8, 35 , 67 ], where Mmat  

> ϕ

predicts the standard PBR G-buffers. This PBR pre-training stage lets the model learn a robust image-to-material mapping before facing the more expressive neural material target. We then fine-tune LMRM on 3D assets annotated with procedurally enhanced neural materials [ 58 ], where Mmat  

> ϕ

predicts the neural ma-terial G-buffer, i.e ., diffuse base color ρd and the specular latent code ℓ, exposing Munc  

> ψ

to the increased ambiguity of recovering multi-lobe reflectance. 

## 5 . Test-Time Optimization of Neural Materials 

Given initial neural material predictions from LMRM, our test-time optimization (TTO) performs differentiable Monte Carlo inverse rendering to further refine material details and improve decomposition (see Fig. 3). Our MC inverse ren-derer follows NVDiffRecMC [ 18 ] but with the PBR specular lobe replaced by a universal neural material basis [58]. 

Forward rendering of NM. For our path tracer with neural materials, the outgoing radiance L(ωo, p) at a surface point 

p in direction ωo is defined by the rendering equation [23]: 

L(ωo, p) = 

Z

> Ω

Li(ωi, p)f (p, ω i, ω o)( ωi · n)dω i. (10) This is an integral of the product of the incident radiance, 4Li(ωi, p) from direction ωi and the neural material SVB-SDF, f (p, ω i, ω o) (Eq. 1). The integration domain is the hemisphere Ω around the surface normal, n. We evaluate the rendering equation using Monte Carlo integration: 

L(ωo, p) ≈ 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Li(ωi, p)f (p, ω i, ω o)( ωi · n)

p(ωi) , (11) with samples drawn from some distribution p(ωi).We leverage multiple importance sampling [49 ] (MIS), a framework for combining multiple sampling techniques to reduce variance in Monte Carlo integration. In our case, we apply MIS with two sampling techniques: light impor-tance sampling, plight (ω), using a piecewise-constant 2D distribution sampling technique [ 42 ], and BSDF sampling, 

pbsdf (ω). The weighting functions wi(x), for each technique are chosen using the balance heuristic [42, 49]. Following Zeltner et al. [ 60 ], our BSDF sampler uses a frozen sampling decoder to extract parameters for two independent GGX lobes for the neural part, then selects one component among the diffuse cosine lobe and the two GGX lobes according to the predicted mixture weights (Eq. 2) and samples it. Using the taxonomy of differentiable Monte Carlo estimators [ 59 ], our importance sampling is detached ,

i.e ., gradients are not back-propagated to scene parameters in the sampling step, only in the material evaluation. 

Inverse rendering of NM: Optimization task. In our setup, the neural component representing non-diffuse con-tributions consists of a universal, frozen decoder MLP Dneu 

operating on a 6D latent code ℓ(p) (Eq. 2). Rather than optimizing the per-point material attributes directly, we ex-pose them through our triplane representation T (see Sec. 3). Together with the frozen material decoder Mmat  

> ϕ

, the tri-plane yields the per-point base color ρd(p) of the traditional diffuse lobe [18] and the specular latent ℓ(p),

ρd(p), ℓ (p) = Mmat  

> ϕ

(T(p)) , (12) so that the LMRM-initialized triplane T (Sec. 4) forms the only optimization parameter. For a given camera pose c, our differentiable path tracer produces an image I(T; c). We light the scene with a known high dynamic range (HDR) environment map, and the ren-derer produces an output image with linear HDR values. We also emphasize that our neural materials are operating in linear HDR, e.g., strong specular peaks can have sig-nificant energy. The reference image Iref (c), a view from the same camera, is typically stored in LDR. We apply a tonemap operator T that maps the renderer output to LDR. The tonemapped rendering loss to optimize the triplane is: 

Lphoto = Ec

h

∥T  I(T; c) − Iref (c)∥22

i

. (13) We minimize the rendering loss using Adam [ 25 ], with gradi-ents ∂Lphoto /∂ T obtained through differentiable path trac-  

> Figure 4. Uncertainty-guided test-time optimization. We opti-mize the latent parameters of the triplane initialized by the LMRM. The triplane is decoded into neural material latents and rendered with our Monte Carlo path tracer, using a tonemapped rendering loss for supervision ( top ). We apply an uncertainty-based material regularization that anchors the optimized material more strongly to the LMRM initialization in regions of low uncertainty ( bottom ).

ing. Note that both the triplane material decoder Mmat  

> ϕ

and the neural material decoder Dneu remain frozen throughout; only the triplane T is updated. 

Uncertainty-guided material regularization. The photo-metric objective in Eq. 13 is under-constrained at the neural material level: due to the rich multi-lobe specular effects, many combinations of base color ρd and specular latent ℓ can explain the same image-space observations. Thus, the test-time optimization may drift toward an implausible material while still minimizing the photometric loss. To mitigate this amibiguity, we leverage the joint material-uncertainty predic-tion from LMRM (Eq. 6). In a single forward pass, LMRM predicts both the initial material mean GLMRM mat (p) and the log-variance GLMRM unc (p). We freeze both as constants during TTO and use them to anchor the current material Gmat (T),decoded from the optimized triplane, through a uncertainty-weighted regularization term: 

Lreg = Ep

"

∥Gmat (T; p) − GLMRM mat (p)∥22

exp  GLMRM unc (p)#

, (14) where the error is computed per material channel and re-ciprocally weighted by the LMRM’s predicted uncertainty 

exp( GLMRM unc ), mirroring the β-NLL term used at training time (Eq. 6). Intuitively, Eq. 14 acts as a Gaussian prior centered at the LMRM prediction: confident triplane regions (small exp( GLMRM unc )) are strongly anchored, suppressing ma-terial drift, while uncertain regions (large exp( GLMRM unc )) are loosely constrained and free to explore and refine the details missing from the feed-forward initialization (see Fig. 4). Overall, the complete test-time optimization objective combines the photometric data term (Eq. 13) with the 5Figure 5. Qualitative results. Our method, NeuMatEx, faithfully reconstructs a wide variety of neural materials from images. Reconstructed neural materials demonstrate complex multi-lobe effects including haze, clearcoat, dust, fuzz, scattering and even their combinations. 

uncertainty-guided material regularizer (Eq. 14), 

arg min 

> T

Lphoto + λreg Lreg , (15) where λreg weights uncertainty-guided material regulariza-tion for achieving robust material decomposition. 

## 6. Experiments 

By combining a novel feed-forward model (LMRM) which predicts neural materials from multi-view observations, with test-time optimization, we can robustly extract high qual-ity neural materials (Fig. 5). In experiments, we visualize renderings of neural materials extracted by NeuMatEx and compare with PBR-based material extraction methods on synthetic and real-world images. We also investigate the benefits of NeuMatEx’s core design choices by analyzing the impact of material initialization and regularization. 

6.1. Neural Material Rendering Performance 

We evaluated rendering performance of the neural materials at 1080p resolution on an RTX 5090 using the Japanese tabletop scene in Fig. 6, which consists of four different neural materials and runs at 3.88 ms per frame at 1 spp in our path tracer with 10 bounces. Note that this number reflects the combined cost of both the neural evaluation and the underlying path-tracing computation. The universal neural material basis consists of MLPs with 4 layers of width 64 (4×64) for BSDF evaluation, a 3×64 auxiliary network for estimating transmission albedo, and a 2×32 sampling network for importance sampling. This clearly indicates that the neural material representation we extract allows for    

> Figure 6. Rendering performance . For a set of reference neural materials, and the runtime performance for path tracing in 1080p resolution with 1 spp and 10 bounces is ∼4ms on an RTX 5090.

real-time performance within a path-tracing context. Please refer to Zeltner et al. [ 60 ] for a thorough analysis of neural material runtime performance and implementation details. 

6.2. Comparison with PBR-based Methods 

As representative examples of recent feed-forward PBR material generation methods, we choose Hunyuan3D-Paint 2.1 [ 48 ] and TRELLIS.2 [ 54 ], using their PBR texture gen-eration mode with known geometry. Note that both Hun-yuan3D and TRELLIS.2 are conditioned on a single input view, while our method uses 17+6 views in the LMRM stage and 17 views for test-time optimization; therefore, this com-parison is to highlight the limitations of PBR rather than a direct comparison. We also adapt NVDiffRecMC [ 18 ], initialized with a PBR prediction from our LMRM, with 6Figure 7. PBR vs. Neural Material (128 spp, relit). All methods use known fixed geometry. For the optimization methods, we use known poses and lighting. Hunyuan3D-2.1 [ 48 ] and TRELLIS.2 [ 54 ] are monocular feed-forward PBR estimation models included to highlight the limitations of PBR, and do not represent a fair comparison to optimization methods. NVDiffRecMC++ is our own extension of NVDiffRecMC [ 18 ] with a feed-forward PBR initialization, serving as a strong optimization-based PBR extraction method. PBR-based methods fail to represent complex SVBSDFs, instead baking specular components into the base color (see insets). NeuMatEx faithfully decomposes these materials by optimizing in the neural material latent space, with a clean base color free of baking and specular artifacts. 

known geometry and lighting, optimizing only the materials. We denote this version NVDiffRecMC++, and argue that it is a strong method for optimization-based PBR extraction. In Fig. 7, we show renderings of extracted materials along-side the diffuse base color for assets with complex specular shading effects, including haze, clearcoat, fuzz, and scatter. We visualize objects with ground-truth (reference) neural materials expressed in the basis from Yu et al. [58] ; all meth-ods are rendered from the input view of Hunyuan3D and TRELLIS.2 for the fairest possible visual comparison. Our method, NeuMatEx, consistently reconstructs materials that are close to the reference, successfully models the specular effects, and separates the diffuse and specular material terms, without baking specular shading into the diffuse base color. In Tab. 1, we report quantitative results, i.e ., PSNR scores for pre-defined 17 orbital views, for both the path-traced ren-derings and base color. NeuMatEx consistently outperforms all the PBR-based methods, showing that the expressiveness of the neural material is essential for faithfully reproducing complex appearance effects that PBR cannot capture. 7Table 1. PBR vs. Neural Material. We compare the image quality (PSNR) scores for renderings (PathTrace) and base color (BaseC-olor), reported over 40 held-out test meshes from [ 58 ]. NeuMatEx shows superior visual quality and material decomposition.                 

> PBR NM
> PSNR ( ↑)Hunyuan3D-2.1 TRELLIS.2 NVDiffRecMC++ NeuMatEx single-view single-view multi-view multi-view PathTrace 24.42 ±3.81 23.55 ±2.90 26.25 ±2.42 34.78 ±2.22
> BaseColor 23.01 ±4.62 23.95 ±4.08 24.89 ±5.71 25.30 ±3.93

Table 2. Effect of the NeuMatEx design choices. We ablate material parameterization (Param.), LMRM initialization (LMRM init.), and uncertainty regularization (Unc. reg.) on 40 held-out test meshes from [ 58 ]. Our full method (f) achieves the best material decomposition and competitive render quality, confirming that a large-scale trained prior and uncertainty-guided regularization are essential for neural material inverse rendering.                                      

> NeuMatEx Config. Material Decomp. (↑)Render Quality (↑)Param. LMRM init. Unc. reg. PSNR BaseColor PSNR Latents PSNR PathTrace
> (a) UV
> ✗✗12.19 ±2.70 14.74 ±1.31 31.67 ±1.79
> (b) ✓✗22.73 ±3.71 25.40 ±3.67 35.67 ±1.80
> (c) ✓✓23.67 ±3.16 26.32 ±4.17 33.94 ±2.57
> (d) Triplane
> ✗✗13.56 ±3.50 17.15 ±2.56 28.67 ±3.03
> (e) ✓✗24.84 ±3.97 26.48 ±4.42 35.51 ±1.93
> (f) ✓✓25.30 ±3.93 26.81 ±4.45 34.78 ±2.22

6.3. Ablations 

Impact of design choices. In Tab. 2, we ablate the design choices of NeuMatEx: the triplane material representation, the impact of the initial material prediction from the LMRM, and the uncertainty regularization. Neural materials are sig-nificantly harder to extract from multi-view images through inverse rendering, and we note that the strong prior from the LMRM initialization greatly improves both the render qual-ity and the material decomposition compared to optimizing from randomly initialized materials ((a),(d) vs. (b),(e)). The impact of uncertainty guided optimization is more subtle, but increases the quality of the material decomposition ((b),(e) vs. (c),(f)). The triplane representation provides a significant quality improvement, since it enforces stricter spatial coher-ence than na ¨ıve UV texture mapping, which helps regularize test-time optimization ((a)-(c) vs. (d)-(f)). 

Impact of uncertainty-guided regularization. In Fig. 8, we qualitatively show a clear improvement in material de-composition from uncertainty-guided regularization. In Tab. 3, we ablate the benefit of uncertainty-guided regulariza-tion for test-time optimization. The unconstrained TTO (row (b)) already outperforms the LMRM prediction alone, and adding uncertainty-guided regularization further improves material decomposition while retaining competitive render quality (row (c)). Also, we evaluate two regularization strate-gies using: our predicted uncertainty GLMRM unc , and an oracle 

Goracle unc that uses material G-buffer errors as uncertainty, i.e ., ideal upper bound case up to scale (row (d)). Our TTO 

Figure 8. Effects of uncertainty-guided regularization. Uncon-strained test-time optimization (column 2) suffers from lighting baked into base color and neural latents. Our uncertainty-guided regularization (column 3) yields well-behaved material intrinsics with improved details over the LMRM initialization (see crops). Table 3. Ablation on TTO regularization. We compare TTO re-sults with and without uncertainty-guided regularization, evaluated on 40 held-out test meshes from [ 58 ]. Our predicted uncertainty (c) closely approaches the oracle upper bound (d), confirming well-calibrated uncertainty estimates that effectively guide TTO.                         

> Material Decomp. ( ↑)Render Quality ( ↑)TTO Regularization Config. PSNR BaseColor PSNR Latents PSNR PathTrace
> (a) No TTO (LMRM pred.) 23.82 ±3.72 26.21 ±4.03 31.99 ±2.95
> (b) TTO w/o reg. 24.84 ±3.97 26.48 ±4.42 35.51 ±1.93
> (c) TTO w/ GLMRM unc (Ours) 25.30 ±3.93 26.81 ±4.45 34.78 ±2.22
> (d) TTO w/ Goracle unc (Ideal upper bound) 25.99 ±4.39 27.31 ±4.44 35.05 ±2.17

with predicted GLMRM unc performs close to the ideal case, sup-porting that LMRM produces well-calibrated uncertainty estimates that effectively guide TTO. 

6.4. Neural Materials from Real-world Captures 

Real-world objects can exhibit complex reflection properties that go beyond the capabilities of the standard PBR model. Extracting expressive neural materials directly from pho-tographs can pave a way for future data-driven SVBSDF model authoring. As a proof-of-concept, we apply Neu-MatEx to extract neural materials from real-world objects. We use the Digital Twin Catalog (DTC) [ 9 ] consisting of high-quality multi-view captures ( ∼ 120 photographs per object) together with meshes, camera poses, and measured environment lighting. First, we use novel-view synthesis to obtain the preset views, i.e ., 17 orbital views and 6 or-thogonal views, needed for our LMRM. Specifically, we use 2D Gaussian Splatting [ 20 ], where we initialize the prim-itives at the mesh surface and the normals with the mesh normals. Then, we run our LMRM on the rendered views to 8Figure 9. Real-world captures. We apply NeuMatEx to real-world captures from the DTC [ 9 ] dataset. Despite the DTC dataset being composed mostly of simple materials and not designed with neural material reconstruction in mind, our extracted materials capture effects beyond the standard PBR, e.g ., clearcoat on the teapot.   

> Figure 10. Relighting real-world neural materials. Relit ren-derings of our extracted neural materials show that the recovered reflectance generalizes across illumination conditions, faithfully reproducing complex specular behavior without baked-in effects.

estimate the initial material. During test-time optimization, we optimize against all real photographs to avoid baking any novel-view-synthesis artifacts. We compare NeuMatEx against NVDiffRecMC++ in Fig. 9. While the PBR materials can reconstruct many sim-ple appearances, they struggle with complex glossy effects and layered reflectance, e.g ., the clearcoat lobe visible on the      

> Figure 11. Limitations. We build on top of a pre-trained neural material basis [ 58 ], inheriting its limitations. This is apparent in the above real-world examples from the DTC [ 9] dataset, where the pre-dicted materials lie outside the valid domain of the basis, resulting in specular artifacts. Our test-time-optimization mostly mitigates this, but artifacts may still be observed, e.g ., in the crevices.

teapot. In contrast, our extracted neural materials are expres-sive enough to capture these effects, producing more faithful reflections. In Fig. 10, the relighting results show that these materials remain stable under illumination changes, yielding realistic reflections without baking in the original lighting. 

## 7. Discussion and Limitations 

We present NeuMatEx, demonstrating that inverse rendering can be extended to recover expressive neural materials from multi-view images and photographs. This is made possi-ble by combining a strong feed-forward initialization from the Large Material Reconstruction Model with uncertainty-guided regularization during test-time optimization, stabiliz-ing the otherwise ill-posed optimization in the neural mate-rial latent space. NeuMatEx outperforms PBR-based meth-ods and recovers richer materials in both synthetic and real-world scenarios, cleanly separating lighting and material response. Although we build on Yu et al.’s [ 58 ] SVBSDF representation, our method is not inherently tied to this basis, and we believe it can be extended to other neural material models. In future work we aim to improve initial material prediction quality, and increase the spatial resolution of the recovered materials to capture finer-scale appearance details. 

Limitations. The complexity of the neural basis still poses a challenge even with our careful initialization. As shown in Fig. 11, LMRM predictions on out-of-domain inputs, such as real-world photographs, can exhibit specular artifacts, usually yielding a red tint, similar to the artifacts observed by Yu et al. [ 58 ]. Our test-time optimization often reduces this issue, but slight artifacts can still be visible. Learning a more robust neural material model, ideally from real-world observations, is therefore an important direction toward truly photorealistic reflectance recovery. 9References 

[1] Dejan Azinovic, Tzu-Mao Li, Anton Kaplanyan, and Matthias Nießner. Inverse path tracing for joint material and lighting estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 2 [2] Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, David Kriegman, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Neural reflectance fields for appearance acquisition. arXiv preprint, 2008.03824 ,2020. 2 [3] Benedikt Bitterli, Petrik Clarberg, Chris Cummings, Aaron Lefohn, Steve Marschner, Jan Nov ´ak, Fabrice Rousselle, An-drea Weidlich, and Tizian Zeltner. Taming optimization vari-ance in compact neural shading networks. In ACM SIG-GRAPH Conference Proceedings , 2026. 2 [4] Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Kihwan Kim, Hendrik Lensch, and Jan Kautz. Two-shot spatially-varying BRDF and shape estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. 2 [5] Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Raphael Braun, Ce Liu, Jonathan Barron, and Hendrik Lensch. Neural-pil: Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2021. 2[6] Brent Burley. Physically-based shading at Disney. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings , pages 1–7, 2012. 3 [7] Wenzheng Chen, Joey Litalien, Jun Gao, Zian Wang, Clement Fuji Tsang, Sameh Khalis, Or Litany, and Sanja Fidler. DIB-R++: Learning to predict lighting and material with a hybrid differentiable renderer. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2021. 2 [8] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A Uni-verse of Annotated 3D Objects. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 4 [9] Zhao Dong, Ka Chen, Zhaoyang Lv, Hong-Xing Yu, Yunzhi Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Yufeng Zhu, Stephen Tian, Zhengqin Li, Geordie Moffatt, Sean Christofferson, James Fort, Xiaqing Pan, Mingfei Yan, Jiajun Wu, Carl Yuheng Ren, and Richard Newcombe. Digital Twin Catalog: A Large-Scale Photoreal-istic 3D Object Digital Twin Dataset. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 8, 9 [10] Jiahui Fan, Beibei Wang, Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan, Jian Yang, and Ling-Qi Yan. Neural Layered BRDFs. In ACM SIGGRAPH Con-ference Proceedings , 2022. 1, 2, 3 [11] Jiahui Fan, Fujun Luan, Jian Yang, Milos Hasan, and Beibei Wang. RNG: Relightable Neural Gaussians. In IEEE Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2025. 2 [12] Duan Gao, Xiao Li, Yue Dong, Pieter Peers, Kun Xu, and Xin Tong. Deep Inverse Rendering for High-Resolution SVBRDF Estimation from an Arbitrary Number of Images. ACM Trans-actions on Graphics , 38(4), 2019. 2 [13] Jian Gao, Chun Gu, Youtian Lin, Hao Zhu, Xun Cao, Li Zhang, and Yao Yao. Relightable 3D Gaussian: Real-time Point Cloud Relighting with BRDF Decomposition and Ray Tracing. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 2 [14] Andrew Gardner, Chris Tchou, Tim Hawkins, and Paul De-bevec. Linear Light Source Reflectometry. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 22(3):749–758, 2003. 2 [15] Abhijeet Ghosh, Tongbo Chen, Pieter Peers, Cyrus A. Wil-son, and Paul Debevec. Estimating Specular Roughness and Anisotropy from Second Order Spherical Gradient Illumina-tion. Computer Graphics Forum , 28(4):1161–1170, 2009. [16] D. Guarnera, G. C. Guarnera, A. Ghosh, C. Denk, and M. Glencross. BRDF Representation and Acquisition. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the European Association for Computer Graphics: State of the Art Reports ,pages 625–650, 2016. 2 [17] Yu Guo, Cameron Smith, Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Shuang Zhao. MaterialGAN: Reflectance Capture Us-ing a Generative SVBRDF Model. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 39(6), 2020. 2 [18] Jon Hasselgren, Nikolai Hofmann, and Jacob Munkberg. Shape, Light, and Material Decomposition from Images us-ing Monte Carlo Rendering and Denoising. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 [19] Jon Hasselgren, Zheng Zeng, Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan, and Jacob Munkberg. VideoMatGen: PBR Materials through Joint Gen-erative Modeling. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Findings (CVPRF) , 2026. 2 [20] Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2D Gaussian Splatting for Geometrically Accurate Radiance Fields. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings . Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. 8 [21] Yingwenqi Jiang, Jiadong Tu, Yuan Liu, Xifeng Gao, Xiaox-iao Long, Wenping Wang, and Yuexin Ma. GaussianShader: 3D Gaussian Splatting with Shading Functions for Reflec-tive Surfaces. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [22] Haian Jin, Isabella Liu, Peijia Xu, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Song-fang Han, Sai Bi, Xiaowei Zhou, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. TensoIR: Tensorial Inverse Rendering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2[23] James T. Kajiya. The rendering equation. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings . ACM Press, 1986. 4 [24] Brian Karis. Real shading in Unreal Engine 4. ACM SIG-GRAPH Course on Physically Based Shading Theory and Practice , 4(3):1, 2013. 3 [25] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2015. 5 [26] Peter Kocsis, Vincent Sitzmann, and Matthias Nießner. Intrin-sic image diffusion for indoor single-view material estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [27] Peter Kocsis, Lukas H ¨ollein, and Matthias Nießner. Intrinsic image fusion for multi-view 3d material reconstruction. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2026. 2 

10 [28] Alexandr Kuznetsov, Krishna Mullia, Zexiang Xu, Milo ˇsHa ˇsan, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. NeuMIP: Multi-Resolution Neural Materials. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 40(4), 2021. 1, 2, 3 [29] Hendrik P.A. Lensch, Jochen Lang, Asla M. Sa, and Hans-Peter Seidel. Planned sampling of spatially varying BRDFs. 

Computer Graphics Forum , 2003. 2 [30] Zhengqin Li, Zexiang Xu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker. Learning to recon-struct shape and spatially-varying reflectance from a single image. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings ,page 269. ACM, 2018. 2 [31] Zhengqin Li, Mohammad Shafiei, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker. Inverse rendering for complex indoor scenes: Shape, spatially-varying lighting and svbrdf from a single image. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. 2 [32] Zhengqin Li, Dilin Wang, Ka Chen, Zhaoyang Lv, Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Milim Lee, Jia bin Huang, Lei Xiao, Cheng Zhang, Yufeng Zhu, Carl S. Marshall, Yufeng Ren, Richard Newcombe, and Zhao Dong. LIRM: Large Inverse Rendering Model for Progressive Reconstruction of Shape, Materials and View-dependent Radiance Fields. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 2[33] Zhihao Liang, Qi Zhang, Ying Feng, Ying Shan, and Kui Jia. Gs-ir: 3d gaussian splatting for inverse rendering. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [34] Chih-Hao Lin, Jia-Bin Huang, Zhengqin Li, Zhao Dong, Christian Richardt, Tuotuo Li, Michael Zollh ¨ofer, Johannes Kopf, Shenlong Wang, and Changil Kim. IRIS: inverse ren-dering of indoor scenes from low dynamic range images. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2025. 2 [35] Yehonathan Litman, Or Patashnik, Kangle Deng, Aviral Agrawal, Rushikesh Zawar, Fernando De la Torre, and Shub-ham Tulsiani. MaterialFusion: Enhancing Inverse Rendering with Material Diffusion Priors. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2025. 2, 4 [36] Fujun Luan, Shuang Zhao, Kavita Bala, and Zhao Dong. Unified shape and svbrdf recovery using differentiable monte carlo rendering. arXiv preprint, 2103.15208 , 2021. 2 [37] Krishna Mullia, Fujun Luan, Xin Sun, and Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan. RNA: Relightable Neural Assets. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,44(1), 2024. 2, 3 [38] Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas M ¨uller, and Sanja Fidler. Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Lighting From Images. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2 [39] Jacob Munkberg, Zian Wang, Ruofan Liang, Tianchang Shen, and Jon Hasselgren. VideoMat: Extracting PBR Materials from Video Diffusion Models. In Eurographics Symposium on Rendering (EGSR) , 2025. 2 [40] Merlin Nimier-David, Zhao Dong, Wenzel Jakob, and An-ton Kaplanyan. Material and Lighting Reconstruction for Complex Indoor Scenes with Texture-space Differentiable Rendering. In Eurographics Symposium on Rendering - DL-only Track . The Eurographics Association, 2021. 2 [41] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. 3 [42] Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys. Physically Based Rendering: From Theory to Implementation . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 4rd edition, 2023. 5 [43] Nithin Raghavan, Krishna Mullia, Alexander Trevithick, Fu-jun Luan, Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Generative Neural Materials. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 43:11, 2025. 2 [44] Gilles Rainer, Adrien Bousseau, Tobias Ritschel, and George Drettakis. Neural Precomputed Radiance Transfer. Computer Graphics Forum , 41(2), 2022. 2 [45] Carolin Schmitt, Simon Donne, Gernot Riegler, Vladlen Koltun, and Andreas Geiger. On joint estimation of pose, ge-ometry and svBRDF from a handheld scanner. In IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2020. 2 [46] Maximilian Seitzer, Arash Tavakoli, Dimitrije Antic, and Georg Martius. On the Pitfalls of Heteroscedastic Uncertainty Estimation with Probabilistic Neural Networks. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. 4[47] Yawar Siddiqui, Tom Monnier, Filippos Kokkinos, Mahendra Kariya, Yanir Kleiman, Emilien Garreau, Oran Gafni, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Roman Shapovalov, and David Novotny. Meta 3D AssetGen: Text-to-Mesh Generation with High-Quality Geometry, Texture, and PBR Materials. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2024. 2 [48] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. Hunyuan3D 2.1: From Images to High-Fidelity 3D Assets with Production-Ready PBR Mate-rial. arXiv preprint, 2506.15442 , 2025. 2, 6, 7 [49] Eric Veach and Leonidas J. Guibas. Optimally Combining Sampling Techniques for Monte Carlo Rendering. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings , pages 419–428, 1995. 5[50] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, et al. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint, 2503.20314 , 2025. 3 [51] Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Yifei Chen, Chendong Xiang, Shuo Chen, Dajiang Yu, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. CRM: Single Image to 3D Textured Mesh with Convo-lutional Reconstruction Model. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. 4 [52] Xinyue Wei, Kai Zhang, Sai Bi, Hao Tan, Fujun Luan, Valentin Deschaintre, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Hao Su, and Zexi-ang Xu. MeshLRM: Large Reconstruction Model for High-Quality Meshes. arXiv preprint, 2404.12385 , 2024. 3 [53] Michael Weinmann and Reinhard Klein. Advances in Ge-ometry and Reflectance Acquisition (Course Notes). In SIG-GRAPH Asia 2015 Courses , 2015. 2 

11 [54] Jianfeng Xiang, Xiaoxue Chen, Sicheng Xu, Ruicheng Wang, Zelong Lv, Yu Deng, Hongyuan Zhu, Yue Dong, Hao Zhao, Nicholas Jing Yuan, and Jiaolong Yang. Native and Compact Structured Latents for 3D Generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2026. 2, 6, 7 [55] Yingyan Xu, Gaspard Zoss, Prashanth Chandran, Markus Gross, Derek Bradley, and Paulo Gotardo. ReNeRF: Re-lightable Neural Radiance Fields with Nearfield Lighting . In 

IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,2023. 2 [56] Bowen Xue, Saeed Hadadan, Zheng Zeng, Fabrice Rousselle, Zahra Montazeri, and Milos Hasan. VideoNeuMat: Neural Material Extraction from Generative Video Models. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings , 2026. 2, 3 [57] Kim Youwang, Tae-Hyun Oh, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Paint-it: Text-to-Texture Synthesis via Deep Convolutional Tex-ture Map Optimization and Physically-Based Rendering. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024. 2 [58] Yunchen (Blaire) Yu, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Chris Cummings, Steve Marschner, and Andrea Weidlich. Toward Richer Material Generation via Procedural Data Enhancement. 

arXiv preprint, 2606.14988 , 2026. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9 [59] Tizian Zeltner, S ´ebastien Speierer, Iliyan Georgiev, and Wen-zel Jakob. Monte Carlo Estimators for Differential Light Transport. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 40(4):78:1–78:16, 2021. 5 [60] Tizian Zeltner*, Fabrice Rousselle*, Andrea Weidlich*, Petrik Clarberg*, Jan Nov ´ak*, Benedikt Bitterli*, Alex Evans, Tom ´a ˇs Davidovi ˇc, Simon Kallweit, and Aaron Lefohn. Real-time Neural Appearance Models. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 43(3), 2024. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 [61] Chong Zeng, Guojun Chen, Yue Dong, Pieter Peers, Hongzhi Wu, and Xin Tong. Relighting Neural Radiance Fields with Shadow and Highlight Hints. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings , 2023. 2 [62] Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan, Ling-Qi Yan, and Milo ˇs Ha ˇsan. RGB ↔X: image decomposition and synthesis using material-and lighting-aware diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings , 2024. 2 [63] Tianyuan Zhang, Zhengfei Kuang, Haian Jin, Zexiang Xu, Sai Bi, Hao Tan, He Zhang, Yiwei Hu, Milos Hasan, William T. Freeman, Kai Zhang, and Fujun Luan. RelitLRM: Generative Relightable Radiance for Large Reconstruction Models. arXiv preprint, 2410.06231 , 2024. 3 [64] Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul Debevec, William T Freeman, and Jonathan T Barron. NeR-Factor: Neural Factorization of Shape and Reflectance Under an Unknown Illumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,2021. 2 [65] Yuxuan Zhang, Wenzheng Chen, Huan Ling, Jun Gao, Yinan Zhang, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Image GANs meet Differentiable Rendering for Inverse Graphics and Inter-pretable 3D Neural Rendering. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. 2 [66] Yuanqing Zhang, Jiaming Sun, Xingyi He, Huan Fu, Rongfei Jia, and Xiaowei Zhou. Modeling indirect illumination for inverse rendering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2 [67] Yibo Zhang, Li Zhang, Rui Ma, and Nan Cao. TexVerse: A Universe of 3D Objects with High-Resolution Textures. arXiv preprint, 2508.10868 , 2025. 4 

12