Title: RINO: Rotation-Invariant Non-Rigid Correspondences

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27773v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:36:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# RINO: Rotation-Invariant Non-Rigid Correspondences 

# Maolin Gao 1,3 Shao Jie Hu-Chen 1,3 Congyue Deng 2,4

# Riccardo Marin 1,3 Leonidas Guibas 2 Daniel Cremers 1,31 TUM 2 Stanford University 3 MCML 4 MIT 

Figure 1. We propose RINO , an unsupervised framework unifying rigid and non-rigid shape matching. Our end-to-end point feature extractor, the RINONet , is invariant to extrinsic rotations and robust to intrinsic symmetries, without relying on handcrafted descriptors (shape orientations indicated by RGB frames). It handles challenging non-rigid matching cases with arbitrary poses, non-isometry, partial-ity, non-manifoldness, and noise. From left to right we show pairs of humanoid, quadruped, airplane, partial and non-manifold shapes. 

# Abstract 

Dense 3D shape correspondence remains a central chal-lenge in computer vision and graphics as many deep learn-ing approaches still rely on intermediate geometric fea-tures or handcrafted descriptors, limiting their effectiveness under non-isometric deformations, partial data, and non-manifold inputs. To overcome these issues, we introduce RINO, an unsupervised, rotation-invariant dense corre-spondence framework that effectively unifies rigid and non-rigid shape matching. The core of our method is the novel RINONet, a feature extractor that integrates vector-based SO(3)-invariant learning with orientation-aware complex functional maps to extract robust features directly from raw geometry. This allows for a fully end-to-end, data-driven approach that bypasses the need for shape pre-alignment or handcrafted features. Extensive experiments show unprece-dented performance of RINO across challenging non-rigid matching tasks, including arbitrary poses, non-isometry, partiality, non-manifoldness, and noise. 

# 1. Introduction 

Establishing correspondence between 3D shapes is a foun-dational and challenging problem in computer vision and graphics. While deep learning has enhanced classical shape matching by replacing handcrafted descriptors with learned features, most approaches still depend on intermediate geo-metric representations rather than operating directly on raw shape data [3, 11, 22, 30, 34, 37]. This reliance on human-designed features, which are often specialized (e.g., for iso-metric shapes), fundamentally limits robustness and gen-eralization across diverse, challenging conditions like non-isometric deformations, partiality, and non-manifold struc-tures. Hence, a compelling alternative is to start learning directly from the raw data — namely, using the vertex co-ordinates as input. Such an approach appears appealing for several reasons: it does not require preprocessing, it does not rely on theoretical assumptions, and it has been the most successful approach in other domains (e.g., CNNs generally take RGB pixel values as input directly, LLMs start from words or sub-words tokens). In accordance with Sutton’s bitter lesson [58], we believe that the path toward robust shape correspondence lies in scalable end-to-end learning, with little or no human-encoded sophistication. However, directly processing raw 3D geometry intro-duces the challenge of shape–pose entanglement , which has traditionally led to splitting the problem into two separate subproblems: rigid matching, estimating global rotations and translations; and non-rigid matching, assuming pose alignment to infer dense correspondences. This separation, however, is inherently ill-posed, as global transformations and local deformations are tightly coupled. The distinction becomes especially ambiguous when canonical poses are hard to define, for example, between a running and a sitting human, or in cases of partial shape matching. To eliminate the need for rigid pose alignment, fully intrinsic shape matching methods [11, 22] leverage hand-crafted intrinsic features (e.g., wks [6]) and intrinsic archi-tectures (e.g., DiffusionNet [54]). Yet, reliance solely on 

> arXiv:2603.27773v1 [cs.CV] 29 Mar 2026

intrinsic information fundamentally limits their scope: it cannot theoretically distinguish shape symmetries, and it yields severely degraded and incompatible features for non-smooth or irregular shapes [26, 27, 35, 67, 68]. In this work, we propose a paradigm that goes beyond the need of manual pose alignment and does not suffer from any of the previous limitations. Our insight stems from three properties which we believe coexist in the ideal shape descriptor: first, it should be robust to noise and artifacts; second, it incorporates the geometric prior provided by the underlying surface; finally, it characterizes shape vertices regardless of the extrinsic orientation of the shape. To our knowledge, no available methods respect all these points. To this end, our idea is to develop a rotation-invariant archi-tecture, which factors out the global shape orientation from the articulations’ non-rigid deformation. In particular, we revise the components of the popular DiffusionNet [54] to be SO(3)-equivariant end-to-end, using a vector neuron rep-resentation. Such modifications are well-motivated by the-oretical derivations that we report in the appendix. Our net-work can learn SO(3)-invariant, geometric features directly from raw 3D geometry. The feature gradients are further integrated with the orientation-aware Complex Functional Maps (CFMaps) [21, 22] to map tangent bundles between shapes. The entire system is then trained using a novel unsupervised loss that unifies Functional Maps (FMaps), CFMaps, and pointwise maps, creating a unified framework that leverages their complementary strengths for achieving high-quality, robust features and correspondences (Fig. 1-3). To summarize, our key contributions are: • We introduce the first unsupervised rotation-invariant dense correspondence method, RINO , that unifies rigid and non-rigid matching. • Our novel feature extractor, RINONet , achieves direct, end-to-end, and robust feature extraction from raw geom-etry, and discovers complex, scalable features without the need for handcrafted descriptors or shape pre-alignment. • We integrate SO(3)-invariant learning with orientation-aware complex FMaps on tangent vector fields, yielding a coherent network architecture and unsupervised loss. • Extensive experiments demonstrate superior performance across challenging non-rigid matching scenarios, includ-ing arbitrary poses, non-isometric deformations, partial-ity, non-manifold structures, and noise perturbations. 

# 2. Related Works 

Non-rigid shape matching aims to find correspondences be-tween points on two shapes. We focus on the most relevant works below and refer to [51, 61] for an extensive review. 

Learning Non-Rigid Correspondences. The Deep Functional Maps framework [34, 43] enabled deep learn-ing in non-rigid matching. It uses a learnable feature   

> Figure 2. Our learned SO(3)-invariant features. We visualize the Euclidean distance to the blue surface point in the learned fea-ture space (darker red means higher similarity). Semantic corre-spondences have a similar feature similarity pattern (left & mid.). The learned feature is invariant to rotations (mid. & right). Shape orientations are depicted by RGB frames.

extractor to refine initial descriptors (e.g., shot [52]) before computing a functional map. This framework has since been extended to zero-shot [2, 4], weakly supervised [53] and unsupervised settings [10, 30], incorporating more advanced objectives [20, 33, 57]. While some explored learning bases [28, 32, 39], the theoretical strength of the Laplace-Beltrami Operator (LBO) bases remains preferred. As a feature extractor, initial works used ResNet with shot or PointNet++/KPConv with xyz [20, 53], but lately DiffusionNet [54] has emerged as the standard for learning robust descriptors [3, 5, 10, 22, 57] among other networks [36, 65]. Notably, the focus of these works has been mainly on designing losses. We instead propose a novel feature extractor that learns SO(3)-invariant features directly from raw 3D geometry. 

Shape Descriptors in 3D Matching. Historically, 3D shape analysis relied on handcrafted descriptors like hks [56], wks [6], and shot [52] to establish canonical fea-ture spaces, which modern deep learning models now use as refined inputs. However, shot is highly sensitive to dis-cretization and mesh connectivity [5], while wks is lim-ited by an isometric assumption (Sec. 6) that fails under significant non-rigid deformation and cannot theoretically disambiguate intrinsic symmetry. This has led to an un-principled reliance on pre-aligned xyz coordinates in chal-lenging datasets [7, 11, 31, 37, 45]. While recent foun-dational 2D features (e.g., DINOv3) offer high expressiv-ity [15, 23, 66], they lack geometric understanding of shape orientation, require upright alignment for multi-view aggre-gation, and struggle to resolve rotational equivariance from data alone. To address these gaps, we propose a principled SO(3)-invariant feature extractor that directly processes raw xyz coordinates, unifying the input feature choice and en-abling genuine data-driven learning from 3D shapes. 

Intrinsic Shape Symmetry. Current approaches either use non-rigorous orientation-aware features [27, 47] or rely on impractical extrinsic pre-alignment [45, 53] to resolve symmetries. While DiffusionNet combined with intrinsic descriptors attempts to learn anisotropic diffusion, it as-sumes consistently oriented normals, which rarely applies in real data. This leads to a lack of performance guar-antees, especially for partial shapes. The use of SO(3)-

variant DiffusionNet with xyz further hinders symmetry disambiguation due to poor handling of shape rotations (cf. Sec. 6.3). We build upon CFMaps [21], which theoretically encodes only orientation-preserving maps, and combine it with our learned SO(3)-invariant features from arbitrarily oriented raw geometry. This eliminates intrinsic symmetry flips without requiring extrinsic pre-alignment. 

Equivariant Learning in 3D Understanding. Equivari-ant neural networks (ENN) inject group symmetry into the learning process [9, 16, 18, 46]. Architectures like Equivariant Point Network [14] offer approximate SE(3)-equivariance, while Tensor Field Networks [59] and e3nn [29] achieve strict continuous SO(3)-equivariance using steerable convolutions, often at a high computational cost. While successful in rigid tasks [44, 69], applying SO(3)-equivariant networks to fine-grained, non-rigid correspon-dence remains a less-explored challenge. 

# 3. Background 

Functional Maps & Complex Functional Maps. The functional maps framework [43] encodes shape matching as a compact function-to-function mapping C between scalar-valued features FX and FY on two shapes X and Y. Us-ing the LBO eigenfunctions Φ· as a basis, the features are represented by coefficients Φ†· F·. The functional map C

is recovered by minimizing an energy that enforces feature preservation and structural regularity: 

Edata (C) = ∥CΦ †X FX − Φ†Y FY ∥2 

> F

, (1) 

CX Y = arg min 

> C

Edata (C) + λEreg (C) (2) where Edata promotes feature preservation, and Ereg en-courages structural properties, implicitly promoting isome-try [22, 48]. Subscripts X /Y are omitted for general shapes. The complex functional maps Q extend the FMaps con-cept to estimate correspondences between tangent vector fields (versus scalar functions) [21]. The optimization struc-ture remains similar to Eq. 2, but it uses vector-valued fea-tures (versus scalar-valued) and the complex eigenbasis of the Connection Laplacian (versus the LBO). The key benefit of Q is its integration of surface orientation, making it suit-able for disambiguating intrinsic shape symmetries. Both C

and Q are small matrices, providing a highly compact rep-resentation compared to pointwise permutation matrices. 

Equivariance and Vector Neurons. Equivariance is a fundamental property where a function F maintains the   

> Figure 3. SO(3)-invariant correspondences. Our method is un-affected by shape orientations. In contrast, baselines (represented by DUOFM) perform well only when train and test shapes are pre-aligned (I/I), failing dramatically on unseen rotations (I/SO(3)).

structure of a transformation R applied to its input u:

F(uR ) = F(u)R, ∀R ∈ T , where T is a transformation group (e.g. 3D rotations). Our work focuses on SO(3) -equivariance due to its relevance in 3D vision. The vector neuron (VN) framework [19] provides a general method for constructing SO(3)-equivariant networks. The core idea is to extend traditional scalar neurons to 3D vectors, enabling a simple, explicit mapping of SO(3) actions to the hidden feature space. This allows for straight-forward generaliza-tion of classic operations, such as the VN-Linear layer: 

VN -linear( uR ) = M(uR )= ( Mu )R = VN -linear( u)R,

where u ∈ Rc×3 is the input with c feature channels and 

M ∈ Rc×c are the learnable parameters. The additional dimension of size 3 is termed the VN dimension . Since in-variance is a specific case of equivariance where F(uR ) = 

F(u), our network learns SO(3) -equivariant latent features that can be easily converted into invariant features to predict rotation-invariant correspondences. 

# 4. SO(3)-Invariant Manifold Learning 

Motivation. We seek an ideal 3D shape descriptor char-acterized by three properties: invariance to extrinsic shape embedding; effective exploitation of surface geometric structure, and robustness to noise and topological varia-tions. The current standard, DiffusionNet [54], fails to sat-isfy all these criteria simultaneously. Its reliance on the ex-trinsic xyz coordinates requires either pre-alignment or the use of manually designed (intrinsic) descriptors as input. To overcome these limitations and realize a purely data-driven, geometric feature extractor, we propose RINONet. Our approach maintains feature diffusion on the surface as in [54], but integrates VN representations to enforce SO(3)-equivariance (cf. Fig. 2). This integration required a care-Figure 4. We propose RINONet , which learns SO(3)-invariant features F from input shape X . Our novel network inherits all nice properties from DiffusionNet [54], and learns smooth, high-quality per-point features, while additionally retaining invariant to SO(3) actions applied to input shapes by employing vector neurons as the feature representation in our hidden layers. The RINONet has a simple structure and contains four consecutive RINONet Blocks at its core, which is combined with VN-EdgeConv and VN-linear layers to achieve the desired I/O dimensionality. The VN-invariant layer is employed to convert SO(3)-equivariant features to invariant ones. 

ful architectural redesign to ensure rotational equivariance across all spatial diffusion and gradient operations. 

Overview. RINONet starts with a VN-EdgeConv layer [19, 64], converting the input xyz coordinates V ∈ Rn×3

into features Rn×c×3 which serves as an aggregation of neighborhood information. The core structure is composed of four consecutive RINONet blocks, after which we ap-pend a VN-invariant layer ([19, Sec.3.5]) to obtain SO(3) -invariant features and, finally, a VN-linear layer to obtain output features with desired dimensionality. Notice that in-ternally our RINONet remains SO(3)-equivariant until the VN-invariant layer (cf. Fig. 4). In the next, we present the design insights of our novel RINONet block and state its property of in-baked SO(3)-equivariance in Thm. 2. The full architecture is illustrated in Fig. 4. For details please refer to the supp.mat.. 

4.1. RINONet Block 

Our RINONet block consists of three main modules: a dif-fusion layer, a gradient layer, and an MLP (cf. Fig. 5). All modules are designed to be SO(3)-equivariant by har-nessing the VN representation. The hidden states of our network, u and d, become vector-valued with dimensional-ity Rn×c×3 (instead of scalar-valued Rn×c), with n vertices and c feature channels. Next, we explain these modules. 

VN-Diffusion Layer. The goal of this layer is to perform feature diffusion using a learned diffusion time t for each feature channel, which governs the size of the spatial sup-port of the resulting features. Naively, feature diffusion is analogous to applying a linear operator Ht on an in-put feature u, yielding h := Ht(u). However, to ensure SO(3)-equivariance, we must apply the same diffusion time 

t across all three VN dimensions of the input feature u.This crucial design, together with the linearity of the dif-fusion operator, guarantees the SO(3)-equivariance, namely 

Ht(uR ) = Ht(u)R. Furthermore, to enhance the model’s ability to adjust the size of its spatial support, the diffusion time t is learned per feature channel. Note that although t

is a learnable parameter updated during back-propagation, it remains fixed during any single feed-forward pass. 

VN-Gradient Layer. The idea of this layer is to com-pute spatial gradient features e from a diffused input fea-ture h to learn radially asymmetric filters, a crucial capa-  

> Figure 5. Our RINONet block is the core of our RINONet, and it consists of three main modules: a VN-Diffusion layer, a VN-Gradient layer, and a VN-MLP. In contrast to the original Diffu-sionNet block [54], ours is SO(3)-equivariant by design.

bility for expressive geometric representation. Similar to [54], we begin by computing the intrinsic spatial gradient 

w := G(h), which is then expressed in the local frame of each vertex as complex numbers. The gradient is trans-formed by a learnable (complex) matrix A ∈ Cc×c, which is further aggregated by Re( w ⊙ Aw ). However, this naive approach breaks the SO(3)-equivariance, as the aggrega-tion operation does not commute with rotation, meaning 

(wR ⊙ AwR )̸ = ( w ⊙ Aw )R. Our idea is an additional summation along the VN dimension to obtain the aggre-gated feature f :

f := sum(Re( w ⊙ Aw ), dim = 1) . (3) where Re extracts the real part of a complex number. In the supp.mat., we demonstrate another equivalent formula-tion of Eq. 3 and prove the following result: 

Theorem 1. The feature f ∈ Rn×c computed as in Eq. 3 is 

SO(3) -invariant. 

After stabilizing training by passing f through a tanh 

layer g := tanh( f ), we obtain the final equivariant features 

e by an element-wise multiplication (with broadcasting) of the invariant feature g ∈ Rn×c with the normalized equiv-ariant feature h ∈ Rn×c×3: e := g ⊙ h. This formulation maintains the network equivariance as much as possible. 

VN-MLP. An MLP consists of linear layers followed by 

ReLU non-linearities, we disable the bias terms in the linear layers, since M(uR ) + b̸ = ( Mu + b)R and swap the 

ReLU with its VN counterpart, to enable equivariance. 

Remark. A RINONet block can be summarized as: 

d = VN -MLP([ u, h, e]) + u, (4) Figure 6. Intrinsic symmetry. Ours fully resolves symmetry, while baselines suffer. Top: partial left-right (legs) and front-back (belly-back) flips. Bottom: full left-right flips (arms and legs). 

where the input feature u, the equivariant diffusion fea-ture h and the equivariant gradient feature e are concate-nated together along the c dimension before going through a VN -MLP .

Theorem 2. The RINONet block is SO(3) -equivariant and the whole RINONet is SO(3) -invariant. 

Please refer to the supp.mat. for a proof. As discussed in [54], a complex matrix A is beneficial for disambiguating intrinsic symmetry due to its aware-ness of the shape orientation. In our experiments, we found that symmetrically flipped correspondences still ap-pear when the xyz coordinates of unaligned shapes are fed into the network (cf. Fig. 6 & Tab. 3). Hence, we pro-pose to exploit CFMaps, which can only encode orientation-preserving maps in theory, to fully eliminate intrinsic sym-metry and regularize learned features. 

# 5. Unsupervised SO(3)-Invariant Matching 

Overview. We integrate our RINONet into a novel triple branch matching framework and propose RINO, the first unsupervised SO(3)-invariant approach for non-rigid shape matching. The process starts by passing two input shapes, 

X and Y (with nX and nY vertices, respectively), through the network to obtain their (flattened) SO(3)-invariant fea-tures FX ∈ RnX ×3c and FY ∈ RnY ×3c in a Siamese fashion (cf. Fig. 2). These expressive features are then leveraged to compute three distinct map representations for matching: a (soft) pointwise map ΠX Y , an FMap CX Y , and a CFMap QX Y . All of them provide important structural properties for the matching that we aim to exploit with a careful coupling of the losses. During inference , RINO can match shapes in a single forward pass by Euclidean near-est neighbor search in the learned feature space. Our full pipeline is shown in Fig. 7.                                        

> Train/Test I/I I/SO(3) SO(3)/SO(3) Y/Y
> CnsFM 5.4 58.7 9.1 5.4 DUOFM 11.7 41.4 25.2 16.5 URSSM 4.8 62.1 24.8 7.9 SMS 4.6 58.5 57.6 39.3 SmpFM 5.6 62.6 9.9 7.3 HbrFM 5.6 61.8 26.4 5.3 Ours 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.6
> Table 1. SO(3)-invariance on SMAL. The rotation type is indi-cated by: I (aligned), SO(3) (fully random rotation), and Y (y-axis rotation). e.g. I/SO(3) means aligned shapes for training and fully randomly rotated shapes for testing. We report mGeoErr ( ↓) and ours consistently outperforms baselines, especially on unseen ro-tations. Best results are bold , and highlighted cells indicate the experiment settings used in baseline papers.

Map Representations. Our method derives three com-plementary map representations from the SO(3) -invariant features FX and FY generated by RINONet. The soft point-wise map is computed via softmax on the feature similar-ity: ΠX Y = Softmax( FX FT 

> Y

/τ ), where τ is a temperature parameter controlling the match entropy. Simultaneously, 

FX and FY are fed into two non-learnable, differentiable blocks: the FMaps and the CFMaps Solver . These blocks efficiently solve convex problems to estimate CX Y and 

QX Y (cf. Eq. 2). Our insight is twofold: first, QX Y inher-ently encodes only orientation-preserving maps, which is essential for disambiguating intrinsic shape symmetry [21]. Second, while CX Y enforces feature consistency, QX Y ad-ditionally enforces consistency of the features’ first-order derivatives (obtained via the gradient operator ∇), leading to more accurate features and correspondences. 

Unsupervised Loss. Our unsupervised objective Ltotal is composed of three terms: a novel coupling loss Lcouple , a structural loss Lstruct , and a contrastive loss Lcontr . The terms Lstruct and Lcontr are inspired by [13, 21, 22, 50], which encourage key properties of C and Q, and discrimi-native per-vertex features (see supp.mat. for details). Our contribution is the Lcouple , which links the three map representations: Π, C, Q, derived from our invariant features. We enforce consistency between the soft point-wise map Π and its functional pullbacks C and Q respec-tively. The coupling loss is defined as: 

Lcouple = LΠC + LΠQ  (5) where LΠC is the consistency between the pointwise map and C, and LΠQ is the proposed term enforcing consistency between the pointwise map and the orientation-aware com-plex functional map Q. This targeted coupling is crucial for simultaneously achieving highly accurate features and ro-bust symmetry disambiguation without requiring excessive coupling that can jeopardize training. Note that although Figure 7. Overview of RINO. Our novel RINONet is used to extract SO(3)-invariant features FX and FY from input shapes X and Y.The features are further processed in three non-learnable but differentiable blocks: the FMaps solver to compute the functional map CX Y ,the CFMaps solver to compute the complex functional map QX Y (based on feature gradients), and the pointwise map block to compute the soft pointwise map ΠX Y based on feature similarity. Finally, our unsupervised loss prompts structural properties of CX Y , QX Y and consistency between different map representations.                                                      

> wks xyz SMAL DT4D FSCAN SMAL DT4D FSCAN
> CnsFM 23.4 9.3 3.6 9.1 7.4 50.5 DUOFM 6.7 15.8 -25.2 55.8 -URSSM 29.6 8.4 3.0 24.8 59.3 24.8 SMS 30.6 58.6 12.1 57.6 64.9 54.0 SmpFM 29.9 15.3 5.7 9.9 5.5 24.3 HbrFM 34.5 5.4 3.5 26.4 33.8 22.1 Ours 28.7 9.8 2.7 4.6 5.3 2.5
> Table 2. Non-isometric and raw scan matching. We report mGeoErr ( ↓) and highlight the best and 2nd best results. Ours out-performs all baselines regardless of the input types. Highlighted cells indicate the experiment settings used in baseline papers.

the coupling of Π and C has been explored in [3, 11, 57], we are the first to study the coupling of all three map rep-resentations. Following our novel pipeline and loss, our es-timated C is an orientation-preserving isometry akin to the results in [22] (cf. supp.mat.). 

# 6. Experiments 

Baselines and Metrics The proposed method is exten-sively compared against state-of-the-art unsupervised shape matching techniques, including the deep complex func-tional maps method DUOFM[22], the deep map cou-pling method URSSM[11], the cycle-consistent multi-matching method CnsFM[57], the deep non-rigid ICP method SMS[12], the hybrid functional maps method HbrFM[7], and the memory-efficient functional maps method SmpFM[37]. The focus on competitive unsuper-vised baselines is due to their superior performance over axiomatic approaches and their practical relevance given the scarcity of 3D assets with ground truth annotations. For a fair evaluation, all shapes are subject to random ro-tation during both training and testing under xyz as in-

FAUST SCAPE E ES #Flips E ES #Flips 

CnsFM 4.4 2.8 25 27.2 7.4 249 DUOFM 28.0 7.2 204 28.3 8.9 232 URSSM 30.0 7.8 240 26.9 7.7 245 SmpFM 3.0 2.7 1 29.9 7.9 63 HbrFM 29.9 7.2 227 27.2 8.1 236 Ours 1.6 1.5 0 2.0 2.0 0    

> Table 3. Symmetry analysis . We compute mGeoErr ( ↓) by allow-ing only symmetry-free correspondences (col. E) and additionally the symmetric ones (col. ES ), and report the number of symmetri-cally flipped estimations out of 400 test pairs (col. #Flips ).

put unless otherwise mentioned, and no post-processing [11, 42, 62, 63] is applied, as all compared methods can be post-processed. For all experiments, we adhere to the Princeton protocol [55], where the standard evaluation metric reported is the mean geodesic error ( mGeoErr ) with respect to the ground truth correspondence. 

6.1. SO(3)-Invariant Matching 

To assess SO(3)-invariant features, we utilized the remeshed SMAL dataset [47, 70] across four train/test con-figurations based on shape rotation: I/I (aligned), Y/Y (y-axis rotated), SO(3) /SO(3) (fully randomly rotated), and 

I/SO(3) (aligned training, fully rotated testing). Due to the non-isometry presented in SMAL, all baselines (ex-cept DUOFM) use xyz coordinates as input. As shown in Tab. 1, while all baselines perform well in the I/I set-ting, their performance significantly degrades in the Y/Y

and SO(3) /SO(3) cases, and crucially, all baselines fail severely in the challenging I/SO(3) configuration (unseen rotation at test time). This confirms that existing methods lack robustness to arbitrary rotational changes and rely on Figure 8. Non-isometric matching on SMAL and DT4D. Our method outperforms all baselines; it is invariant to extrinsic rigid poses (no pre-alignment) and robust to intrinsic shape symmetry by directly processing raw shape geometry. 

shape alignment. While data augmentation can partially ad-dress this at the cost of training effort, our method achieves SO(3)-invariant features by design, thus completely elimi-nating the need for cumbersome and inefficient rotational augmentation. See Fig. 3 for visual examples. 

6.2. Non-Isometric Matching 

To evaluate our method’s robustness to non-isometric de-formations, we utilize the SMAL and DT4D [38, 47, 70] datasets, with quantitative results reported in Tab. 2. RINO outperforms all baselines, regardless of their input type. This superior performance directly addresses the known limitation of spectral descriptors like wks, whose near-isometric dependency makes them unstable under non-isometric deformation. By leveraging SO(3)-invariance, RINO is able to directly process raw 3D geometry. Qual-itative results in Fig. 8 further show that our approach successfully yields high-quality, flip-free correspondences, whereas baselines suffer from non-smoothness and intrin-sic left-right symmetry. We also notice the effectiveness of SmpFM when using xyz, which is undiscovered in its orig-inal paper. This is likely due to its effective architecture, which limits the use of SO(3)-variant features only in the differentiable Zoomout module, thereby avoiding detrimen-tal coupling with low-quality pointwise maps. Methods like DUOFM and URSSM struggle to learn meaningful corre-spondences under challenging random rotations. Addition-ally, results on the FAUSTSCAN [8] (denoted as FSCAN) are reported, with further discussion in the supp.mat.. 

6.3. Disambiguating Intrinsic Symmetry 

This experiment analyzes robustness against intrinsic sym-metry using SCAPE and FAUST [1, 8], with results in Tab. 3. Allowing for symmetrically flipped matches sig-nificantly improves baseline accuracy, indicating that a sub-stantial portion of their correspondence error is due to sym-metry confusion (symmetric flips in ∼200 of 400 test pairs). Our method inherently avoids this issue due to the inte-gration of CFMaps. While DUOFM also uses CFMaps, it still confuses symmetry because its features are not SO(3)-invariant, making them dependent on extrinsic embeddings. Although DiffusionNet’s spatial gradient features can offer some aid via anisotropic diffusion [54, Fig. 5], we found it insufficient to fully resolve intrinsic symmetry, especially under random shape rotations. 

6.4. Partial Shape Matching 

The severe non-isometry inherent in partial shapes often forces baselines to switch their input features to xyz co-ordinates. Following the training strategy of [11], we first pretrain RINO on a collection of four full shape datasets (DT4D, SMAL, FAUST, SCAPE) for two epochs. The model is then fine-tuned on the SHREC16-Partiality (CUTS and HOLES) [17, 24] for 500 epochs, without any post-Figure 9. Qualitative results on SHREC16-Partiality. 

URSSM EchoMatch Wormhole Ours 

CUTS 42.1 12.7 48.2 6.7 HOLES 29.8 57.1 26.9 12.09   

> Table 4. mGeoErr ( ↓) on SHREC16-Partiality. Ours outper-forms all baselines, including the supervised method EchoMatch.

processing for evaluation. As shown in Tab. 4, RINO out-performs strong partial matching baselines, even the super-vised method EchoMatch. This superior performance is a strong indication that the ability to handle unaligned partial shapes, a feature built into our design, is crucial for success-ful partial shape matching (cf. Fig. 9). 

6.5. Robustness under Noise 

To analyze robustness to noise, we evaluate ours and base-lines on ten SCAPE shapes corrupted by Gaussian noise with variance σ ∈ [1 e-3, 1e-2] . As shown in Fig. 11, while all baselines perform acceptably up to σ = 4 e-3,ours demonstrates superior robustness, with performance noticeably degrading only after σ = 6 e-3, beyond which the degradation rate is approximately linear. At this high noise level, ours maintains accurate correspondences where base-lines yield spurious results (cf. Fig. 20). We attribute this advantage to two factors: 1) our design processes xyz coor-dinates directly, avoiding noise-sensitive shape descriptors like wks; and 2) our RINONet has a significantly reduced number of trainable parameters, which acts as a powerful regularization effect, enhancing generalization to imperfect          

> Figure 10. Human Segmentation. We show the segmentation results of DiffusionNet and ours on the composite dataset[40]. Our RINONet produces sharper segments.
> 02e-34e-36e-38e-31e-2
> 1
> 5
> 9
> 13
> noise std σ
> mGeoErr
> CnsFM
> URSSM
> HbrFM
> Ours
> Figure 11. Robustness under noise perturbations.

shapes. 

6.6. Segmentation & More 

As a proof-of-concept, we employ RINONet for human seg-mentation tasks using the composite dataset introduced in [40]. We compare against the SoTA DiffusionNet [54] and Fig. 10 shows the superior performance in the segmentation task, hence the promising potential of RINONet in a wider range of 3D understanding tasks. Please refer to the supp.mat. for further studies on com-putational complexity, an ablation analysis of our loss and architecture, and experimental results on both isometric and non-manifold shapes. 

# 7. Conclusion 

We introduce RINO , the first unsupervised rotation-invariant dense correspondence method that unifies rigid and non-rigid matching. At its core is the novel fea-ture extractor RINONet , that enables end-to-end SO(3)-invariant feature learning on surfaces. The integration with orientation-aware CFMaps further ensures robustness to in-trinsic shape symmetries. Our method takes a significant step toward shape matching methods that are applicable to real-world data and achieves new SoTA across challeng-ing non-rigid matching scenarios, including arbitrary poses, non-isometric deformations, partiality, non-manifold struc-tures, and noise perturbations, thereby validating the fea-sibility and full potential of a genuinely data-driven non-rigid matching paradigm. As promising future work, we will explore matching methods that can directly consume the learned vector-valued features (avoiding feature flatten-ing). We hope our work can inspire further advancements in rotation-invariant and data-driven 3D shape understanding. Acknowledgment 

We thank Vladimir Golkov, Thomas Dag` es, Viktoria Ehm, and Linus H¨ arenstam-Nielsen for proofreading the early version of the manuscript and providing valuable feedback, which significantly improved the work. We are also grateful to Nicolas Donati and Simone Melzi for the fruitful and in-spiring discussions. We express our gratitude to the respec-tive funding agencies. MG, SH, RM, and DC are supported by the ERC Advanced Grant SIMULACRON and the Mu-nich Center for Machine Learning. MG also acknowledges support from the Bavarian Californian Technology Center. CD and LG gratefully acknowledge support from the Toy-ota Research Institute University 2.0 Program, a Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship, and a gift from the Flexiv Corpo-ration. Additionally, CD is supported by a Tayebati Post-doctoral Fellowship. 

# References 

[1] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Se-bastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis. SCAPE: shape completion and animation of people. In TOG , 2005. 7, 3 [2] Souhaib Attaiki and Maks Ovsjanikov. NCP: Neural corre-spondence prior for effective unsupervised shape matching. In NeurIPS , 2022. 2 [3] Souhaib Attaiki and Maks Ovsjanikov. Understanding and improving features learned in deep functional maps. In 

CVPR , 2023. 1, 2, 6 [4] Souhaib Attaiki and Maks Ovsjanikov. Shape non-rigid kinematics (SNK): a zero-shot method for non-rigid shape matching via unsupervised functional map regularized re-construction. In NeurIPS , 2023. 2 [5] Souhaib Attaiki, Gautam Pai, and Maks Ovsjanikov. DPFM: Deep partial functional maps. In 3DV , 2021. 2 [6] Mathieu Aubry, Ulrich Schlickewei, and Daniel Cremers. The wave kernel signature: A quantum mechanical approach to shape analysis. In ICCV Workshops , 2011. 1, 2 [7] Lennart Bastian, Yizheng Xie, Nassir Navab, and Zorah L¨ ahner. Hybrid functional maps for crease-aware non-isometric shape matching. CVPR , 2024. 2, 6 [8] Federica Bogo, Javier Romero, Matthew Loper, and Michael J Black. FAUST: Dataset and evaluation for 3D mesh registration. In CVPR , 2014. 7, 3 [9] Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geometric deep learning: Going beyond Euclidean data. Signal Processing Magazine ,2017. 3 [10] Dongliang Cao and Florian Bernard. Unsupervised deep multi-shape matching. In ECCV , 2022. 2 [11] Dongliang Cao, Paul Roetzer, and Florian Bernard. Unsu-pervised learning of robust spectral shape matching. In TOG ,2023. 1, 2, 6, 7, 3 [12] Dongliang Cao, Marvin Eisenberger, Nafie El Amrani, Daniel Cremers, and Florian Bernard. Spectral meets spa-tial: Harmonising 3d shape matching and interpolation. In 

CVPR , 2024. 6 [13] Dongliang Cao, Paul Roetzer, and Florian Bernard. Revis-iting map relations for unsupervised non-rigid shape match-ing. In 3DV , 2024. 5, 2 [14] Haiwei Chen, Shichen Liu, Weikai Chen, Hao Li, and Ran-dall Hill. Equivariant point network for 3d point cloud anal-ysis. CVPR , 2021. 3 [15] Zhangquan Chen, Puhua Jiang, and Ruqi Huang. DV-Matcher: Deformation-based non-rigid point cloud matching guided by pre-trained visual features. In CVPR , 2025. 2 [16] Taco S. Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convo-lutional networks. In ICML , 2016. 3 [17] Luca Cosmo, Emanuele Rodola, Michael M Bronstein, Andrea Torsello, Daniel Cremers, Y Sahillioglu, et al. SHREC’16: Partial matching of deformable shapes. 3DOR ,2016. 7, 3 [18] Pim de Haan, Maurice Weiler, Taco Cohen, and Max Welling. Gauge equivariant mesh cnns: Anisotropic con-volutions on geometric graphs. In ICLR , 2021. 3 [19] Congyue Deng, Or Litany, Yueqi Duan, Adrien Poulenard, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Leonidas Guibas. Vector neurons: A general framework for SO(3)-equivariant networks. In 

ICCV , 2021. 3, 4, 1 [20] Nicolas Donati, Abhishek Sharma, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Deep geometric functional maps: Robust feature learning for shape correspondence. In CVPR , 2020. 2, 1 [21] Nicolas Donati, Etienne Corman, Simone Melzi, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Complex functional maps: a conformal link be-tween tangent bundles. In CGF , 2022. 2, 3, 5, 1 [22] Nicolas Donati, Etienne Corman, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Deep orientation-aware functional maps: Tackling symme-try issues in shape matching. In CVPR , 2022. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6[23] Niladri Shekhar Dutt, Sanjeev Muralikrishnan, and Niloy J. Mitra. Diffusion 3d features (diff3f): Decorating untextured shapes with distilled semantic features. In CVPR , 2024. 2 [24] Viktoria Ehm, Paul Roetzer, Marvin Eisenberger, Maolin Gao, Florian Bernard, and Daniel Cremers. Geometrically consistent partial shape matching. In 3DV , 2023. 7 [25] Viktoria Ehm, Maolin Gao, Paul Roetzer, Marvin Eisen-berger, Daniel Cremers, and Florian Bernard. Partial-to-partial shape matching with geometric consistency. In CVPR ,2024. 3 [26] Maolin Gao, Zorah L¨ ahner, Johan Thunberg, Daniel Cre-mers, and Florian Bernard. Isometric multi-shape matching. In CVPR , 2021. 2 [27] Maolin Gao, Paul Roetzer, Marvin Eisenberger, Zorah L¨ ahner, Michael Moeller, Daniel Cremers, and Florian Bernard. SIGMA: Quantum scale-invariant global sparse shape matching. In ICCV , 2023. 2 [28] Maolin Gao, Huajian Zeng, and Daniel Cremers. CoE: Deep coupled embedding for non-rigid point cloud corre-spondences. In 3DV , 2025. 2 [29] Mario Geiger and Tess Smidt. e3nn: Euclidean neural net-works. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09453 , 2022. 3 [30] Oshri Halimi, Or Litany, Emanuele Rodol` a Rodol` a, Alex M. Bronstein, and Ron Kimmel. Unsupervised learning of dense shape correspondence. In CVPR , 2019. 1, 2 [31] Qi-Xing Huang and Leonidas Guibas. Consistent shape maps via semidefinite programming. In CGF , 2013. 2 [32] Puhua Jiang, Mingze Sun, and Ruqi Huang. Neural intrinsic embedding for non-rigid point cloud matching. In CVPR ,2023. 2 [33] Tung Le, Khai Nguyen, Shanlin Sun, Nhat Ho, and Xiaohui Xie. Integrating efficient optimal transport and functional maps for unsupervised shape correspondence learning. In 

CVPR , 2024. 2 [34] Or Litany, Tal Remez, Emanuele Rodol` a, Alex Bronstein, and Michael Bronstein. Deep functional maps: Structured prediction for dense shape correspondence. In ICCV , 2017. 1, 2 [35] Hsueh-Ti Derek Liu, Alec Jacobson, and Keenan Crane. A Dirac operator for extrinsic shape analysis. In CGF , 2017. 2 [36] Arman Maesumi, Tanish Makadia, Thibault Groueix, Vladimir Kim, Daniel Ritchie, and Noam Aigerman. Pois-sonNet: A local-global approach for learning on surfaces. 

SIGGRAPH Asia , 2025. 2 [37] Robin Magnet and Maks Ovsjanikov. Memory-scalable and simplified functional map learning. In CVPR , 2024. 1, 2, 6 [38] Robin Magnet, Jing Ren, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Smooth non-rigid shape matching via effective dirichlet energy optimization. In 3DV , 2022. 7, 3 [39] Riccardo Marin, Marie-Julie Rakotosaona, Simone Melzi, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Correspondence learning via linearly-invariant embedding. In NeurIPS , 2020. 2 [40] Haggai Maron, Meirav Galun, Noam Aigerman, Miri Trope, Nadav Dym, Ersin Yumer, Vladimir G. Kim, and Yaron Lip-man. Convolutional neural networks on surfaces via seam-less toric covers. TOG , 2017. 8, 5, 6 [41] S. Melzi, R. Marin, E. Rodol` a, U. Castellani, J. Ren, A. Poulenard, P. Wonka, and M. Ovsjanikov. Matching Humans with Different Connectivity. In 3DOR , 2019. 3 [42] Simone Melzi, Jing Ren, Emanuele Rodol` a, Abhishek Sharma, Peter Wonka, and Maks Ovsjanikov. ZoomOut: Spectral upsampling for efficient shape correspondence. In 

TOG , 2019. 6 [43] Maks Ovsjanikov, Mirela Ben-Chen, Justin Solomon, Adrian Butscher, and Leonidas Guibas. Functional maps: A flexible representation of maps between shapes. In TOG , 2012. 2, 3 [44] Chunghyun Park, Seungwook Kim, Jaesik Park, and Minsu Cho. Learning SO(3)-invariant semantic correspondence via local shape transform. In CVPR , 2024. 3 [45] Emery Pierson, Lei Li, Angela Dai, and Maks Ovsjanikov. DiffuMatch: Category-agnostic spectral diffusion priors for robust non-rigid shape matching. ICCV , 2025. 2 [46] Adrien Poulenard, Marie-Julie Rakotosaona, Yann Ponty, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Effective rotation-invariant point cnn with spherical harmonics kernels. 3DV , 2019. 3, 5 [47] Jing Ren, Adrien Poulenard, Peter Wonka, and Maks Ovs-janikov. Continuous and orientation-preserving correspon-dences via functional maps. In TOG , 2018. 2, 6, 7 [48] Jing Ren, Mikhail Panine, Peter Wonka, and Maks Ovs-janikov. Structured regularization of functional map com-putations. In CGF , 2019. 3 [49] Jing Ren, Simone Melzi, Peter Wonka, and Maks Ovs-janikov. Discrete optimization for shape matching. In CGF ,2021. 2, 6 [50] Jean-Michel Roufosse, Abhishek Sharma, and Maks Ovs-janikov. Unsupervised deep learning for structured shape matching. In ICCV , 2019. 5, 1, 6 [51] Yusuf Sahillio˘ glu. Recent advances in shape correspon-dence. Visual Computer , 2020. 2 [52] Samuele Salti, Federico Tombari, and Luigi Di Stefano. SHOT: Unique signatures of histograms for surface and tex-ture description. Computer Vision and Image Understand-ing , 2014. 2 [53] Abhishek Sharma and Maks Ovsjanikov. Weakly supervised deep functional maps for shape matching. In NeurIPS , 2020. 2[54] Nicholas Sharp, Souhaib Attaiki, Keenan Crane, and Maks Ovsjanikov. DiffusionNet: Discretization agnostic learning on surfaces. In TOG , 2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 [55] P. Shilane, P. Min, M. Kazhdan, and T. Funkhouser. The princeton shape benchmark. In Proceedings Shape Modeling Applications , 2004. 6 [56] Jian Sun, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Leonidas Guibas. A concise and provably informative multi-scale signature based on heat diffusion. In CGF , 2009. 2 [57] Mingze Sun, Shiwei Mao, Puhua Jiang, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Ruqi Huang. Spatially and spectrally consistent deep functional maps. In ICCV , 2023. 2, 6 [58] Richard S. Sutton. The bitter lesson. Incomplete Ideas , 2019. 1[59] Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural net-works for 3D point clouds. arXiv:1802.08219 , 2018. 3 [60] Greg Turk and Marc Levoy. Zippered polygon meshes from range images. In Conference on Computer Graphics and In-teractive Techniques . Association for Computing Machinery, 1994. 5 [61] Oliver Van Kaick, Hao Zhang, Ghassan Hamarneh, and Daniel Cohen-Or. A survey on shape correspondence. In 

CGF , 2011. 2 [62] Matthias Vestner, Zorah L¨ ahner, Amit Boyarski, Or Litany, Ron Slossberg, Tal Remez, Emanuele Rodola, Alex Bron-stein, Michael Bronstein, Ron Kimmel, et al. Efficient de-formable shape correspondence via kernel matching. In 3DV ,2017. 6 [63] Giulio Vigan` o, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Simone Melzi. NAM: Neural adjoint maps for refining shape correspondences. 

TOG , 2025. 6 [64] Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M. Solomon. Dynamic graph CNN for learning on point clouds. In TOG , 2019. 4 [65] Ruben Wiersma, Ahmad Nasikun, Elmar Eisemann, and Klaus Hildebrandt. DeltaConv: anisotropic operators for ge-ometric deep learning on point clouds. TOG , 2022. 2 [66] Yizheng Xie, Viktoria Ehm, Paul Roetzer, Nafie El Am-rani, Maolin Gao, Florian Bernard, and Daniel Cremers. EchoMatch: Partial-to-partial shape matching via correspon-dence reflection. In CVPR , 2025. 2 [67] Zi Ye. Discrete Spin Geometry for Surfaces . PhD thesis, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen, 2020. 2 [68] Zi Ye, Olga Diamanti, Chengcheng Tang, Leonidas Guibas, and Tim Hoffmann. A unified discrete framework for intrin-sic and extrinsic Dirac operators for geometry processing. In 

CGF , 2018. 2 [69] Jia-Xing Zhong, Ta-Ying Cheng, Yuhang He, Kai Lu, Kaichen Zhou, Andrew Markham, and Niki Trigoni. Multi-body SE(3) equivariance for unsupervised rigid segmenta-tion and motion estimation. NeurIPS , 2023. 3 [70] Silvia Zuffi, Angjoo Kanazawa, David Jacobs, and Michael J. Black. 3D menagerie: Modeling the 3D shape and pose of animals. In CVPR , 2017. 6, 7, 3 RINO: Rotation-Invariant Non-Rigid Correspondences 

# Supplementary Material 

# 8. RINONet: Discussion and Proof 

VN-Gradient Layer. Following the notation in [54], we introduce another formulation of our equivariant gradient layer. We first compute the spatial gradient z ∈ Cn×3 of the diffused feature h ∈ Rn×3 as z = G(h), where G is the intrinsic spatial gradient operator defined on the shape surface. Then at each (single) vertex v, the local gradients of all feature channels are stacked to form w ∈ Cc×3 and obtain real-valued features f ∈ Rc as: 

f := Re(diag( w(Aw )T ))  (6) where A is a learnable square Cc×c matrix, diag( ·) ex-tracts the diagonal of an input (square) matrix and taking the real part by Re( ·) after a complex conjugate w is a no-tational convenience for dot products between a pair of 2D vectors. The ith entry of the output at vertex v is given by the inner product f i = Re( Pcj=1 ⟨wi, Aij wj ⟩) with vec-tors wi, wj ∈ C1×3.Note that Eq. 6 is the same as Eq. 3 in the main paper by using a more compact notation, which will help to prove Theorem 1 as shown below. 

Proof of Theorem 1. 

Proof. Given a rotation matrix R ∈ SO (3) applied on the input w, we leverage the property of rotation group and lin-ear algebra tricks. 

f i(wR ) = Re( 

> c

X

> j=1

⟨wiR, Aij (wj R)⟩) (7) 

= Re( 

> c

X

> j=1

⟨wiR, Aij wj R⟩) (8) 

= Re( 

> c

X

> j=1

⟨wiRR T , Aij wj ⟩) (9) 

= Re( 

> c

X

> j=1

⟨wi, Aij wj ⟩) (10) 

= f i(w) (11) Hence, Eq. 6 and f is SO(3)-invariant. Note that applying tanh activation on invariant features does not change the invariance. Therefore, g := tanh( f ) is also SO(3)-invariant. 

Proof of Theorem 2. 

Proof. We first prove the equivariance of the RI-NONet block, which boils down to show that Eq. 4 is equiv-ariant. Since VN -MLP is equivariant [19], it remains to show that the network input [u, h, e] is equivariant. This is a direct consequence of the equivariance of heat diffu-sion Ht(·) and Theorem 1. More specifically, if the input feature u is rotated by R ∈ SO (3) , the corresponding dif-fusion feature h and gradient feature e will become hR 

and eR respectively. Hence their concatenation leads to 

[uR , hR , eR ] = [ u, h, e]R. Therefore Eq. 4 is equivari-ant. Based on the result above, we now prove the invariance of the whole RINONet. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the RI-NONet is a linear composition of a chain of equivariant lay-ers, followed by a VN -invariant layer and VN -linear layer. It is trivial to observe that: • Composition of equivariance functions keeps the equiv-ariance. • Composition of equivariant function with invariant func-tion leads to invariance. Hence, the whole RINONet is SO(3)-invariant. 

# 9. Unsupervised SO(3)-Equivariant Matching 

9.1. Unsupervised Loss 

Our unsupervised loss Ltotal = Lstruct + Lcouple + Lcontr 

guides the RINONet to learn features that are aware of the surface geometry and orientation, while being robust to shape artifacts such as partiality, non-manifoldness, and noise perturbation. Below, we provide the full formulation for each component. 

Structural Loss. The structural loss ensures that the es-timated functional maps exhibit desirable geometric prop-erties. Following prior works [20, 50], we enforce near-orthogonality and bijectivity for the standard functional map C and orthogonality for the complex functional map 

Q. Although the orthogonality term penalizes deviation of both C and Q from being orthogonal, it corresponds to en-forcing different properties: while the orthogonality of C

encourages local area-preservation, it is a necessary prop-erty for Q to represent a valid push-forward [21, 22]. 

Lorth (CX Y ) = ∥CT 

> X Y

CX Y − I∥ (12) 

Lorth (QX Y ) = ∥QT 

> X Y

QX Y − I∥ (13) The bijectivity term enforces that the map from X to 

Y and back to X is the identity map, promoting cycle-consistency. 

Lbij (CX Y , CYX ) = ∥CX Y CYX − I∥ (14) Our total structural loss, applied bi-directionally, is: 

Lstruct =λ1Lorth (CX Y ) + λ1Lorth (CYX ) (15) 

+λ2Lorth (QX Y ) + λ2Lorth (QYX )+λ3Lbij (CX Y , CYX ) + λ3Lbij (CYX , CX Y )

where λi are Langragian weights. 

Coupling Loss. The coupling loss ensures mutual consis-tency between the three map representations derived from the invariant features: the soft pointwise map Π, the func-tional map C, and the complex functional map Q. Similar to previous work [3, 11, 49, 57], we couple the soft point-wise map ΠYX with CX Y by converting the pointwise map to its corresponding functional map ˆCX Y = Φ†Y ΠYX ΦX :

LΠC = ∥CX Y − ˆCX Y ∥2 

> F

(16) Additionally, we propose to couple ΠYX with the orientation-aware complex functional map QX Y . This is achieved by first converting ΠYX to ˆCX Y and then convert-ing ˆCX Y to its complex functional map equivalent, ˆQX Y ,which can be done in closed-form using singular value de-composition (SVD) [21, Appendix F]: 

LΠQ = ∥QX Y − ˆQX Y ∥2 

> F

(17) The total coupling loss is: 

Lcouple = λ4(LX Y  

> ΠC

+ LYX 

> ΠC

) + λ5(LX Y  

> ΠQ

+ LYX 

> ΠQ

) (18) We empirically found that directly coupling C and 

Q jeopardizes training convergence, especially during the early stages of training, when feature quality is still low, resulting in inferior performance (Tab. 8). Our strategy of coupling through the more relaxed pointwise map provides a more stable regularization. 

Contrastive Loss. This term encourages the learned in-variant features to be distinct across the surface by ensuring bijective functional self-maps, ˆCX X and ˆCYY .

Lcontr = λ6



∥ ˆCX X − I∥2 

> F

+ ∥ ˆCYY − I∥2

> F



where ˆCX X = Φ†X ΠX X ΦX and ΠX X =Softmax( FX FT 

> X

/τ ) [13], and similar for shape Y.

9.2. Orientation-Preserving Isometry 

The functional map C is orientation-preserving, analogous to [21]. Here, we provide the full proof for the ease of the reader. 

Theorem 3. Let the functional map C (possibly infinite-dimensional) estimated from features be an isometry and 

Q the complex functional map estimated by the gradient of the features. Then the map C is an orientation-preserving isometry. Proof. Idea: we aim to prove that C and Q satisfy the fol-lowing equation (cf. Eq.10 in [22]): 

⟨X, ∇X (f ◦ φ)⟩TpX = ⟨Q(X), ∇Y f ⟩Tφ(p)Y (19) where φ : X → Y is the isometric pointwise map, and 

C : L2(Y) → L 2(X ) is the corresponding pullback, which transfers SO(3) -invariant features, namely C(FY ) = FX .Furthermore, the complex functional map, also known as the pushforward Q : T X → T Y transfers the gradi-ent of the invariant features Q(∇X FX ) = ∇Y FY and is complex-linear. Given an arbitrary feature function f :

Y → R, a tangent vector field X ∈ T X and a point p ∈ X ,we have the following equalities: 

⟨Q(∇X FX ), ∇Y f ⟩T Y = ⟨∇ Y FY , ∇Y f ⟩T Y (20) 

= ⟨dφ −1(∇Y FY ), dφ −1(∇Y f )⟩T X (21) 

= ⟨∇ X (CF Y ), ∇X (Cf )⟩T X (22) 

= ⟨∇ X FX , ∇X (Cf )⟩T X (23) The first equality follows by applying the definition 

Q(∇X FX ) = ∇Y FY . The second equality holds since the metric is preserved by the pullback dφ −1. (This assumes the invertibility of φ, which means exact correspondences.) The third equality utilizes the fact that the pullback com-mutes with the gradient. And the final equality follows due to the definition C(FY ) = FX .Let X := ∇X FX , we arrive at the Eq. 19 that we ini-tially want to prove. According to Theorem 2 in [22], the functional map C is an orientation-preserving isometry. In particular, this theorem also holds for invariant (resp. equivariant) features estimated by RINONet. 

# 10. Experimental Details 

Implementation details. Our RINONet takes the xyz co-ordinate of the mass-centered 3D shape as input. To facili-tate a fair comparison, we chose the internal feature dimen-sion in our RINONet block as c = 42 such that the flattened feature has 126(= 42 × 3) dimensions, which is similar to the original DiffusionNet, whose hidden feature dimension is 128. Note that our network has only 327 , 714 training Ours URSSM DUOFM CnsFM SMS SmpFM HbrFM #params(k, ↓) 327.7 510.3 477.8 477.8 1,266.2 1,848.4 494.3 runtime(s, ↓) 0.065 0.023 0.071 0.055 15.311 0.171 0.043 mGeoErr ( ↓) 4.6 24.8 25.2 9.1 57.6 9.9 26.4 

Table 5. Comparison of runtime, #params and mGeoErr on SMAL. 60  

> 70 57.4

wks xyz                                                                  

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 2.4 2.6 1.9 3.2 2.9 1.8 1.9
> 27.2 28.3 26.9 29.9 27.2
> 2.0
> SCAPE 60
> 70 63.2
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 2.3 2.4 1.6
> 16.0
> 2.7 1.4 1.6 4.4
> 28.0 30.0
> 3.4
> 29.9
> 1.6
> FAUST 60
> 70 63.6
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 2.5 2.7 1.6 4.0 6.2 3.2 2.5
> 27.1 28.3 25.6 29.9 28.0
> 1.7
> FAUST 60
> 70 56.7 55.7
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 3.2 4.2 2.2
> 22.6
> 4.5 4.6 2.3 4.3
> 24.9 27.5
> 3.8 8.7
> SCAPE 60
> 70 66.2
> CnsFM DUOFM URSSM SMS SmpFM HbrFM RINO (Ours)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 7.3 8.4 6.7
> 20.8 14.0 18.9 11.5
> 23.3 26.7 32.1 36.5 32.9
> 6.2
> SHREC19 60
> 70 64.3
> CnsFM DUOFM URSSM SMS SmpFM HbrFM RINO (Ours)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 6.9 6.4 5.7 9.0 9.0 8.4 4.9 5.1
> 24.0 24.9
> 14.8
> 28.0
> 7.8
> SHREC19

Figure 12. MGeoErr( ↓) on SCAPE, FAUST, SCHREC19. (Left) trained on SCAPE; (Right) trained on FAUST. Y-axis dataset labels indicate the test dataset. MGeoErr is annotated on top of each bar. All baselines significantly deteriorate when changing from wks to xyz, whereas ours is more robust to these changes. To our best knowledge, RINO is the first method, which learns competitive features and correspondences directly from raw 3D geometry in a purely data-driven manner. 

parameters, which is approximately 2/3 of the Diffusion-Net ( 510 , 336 trainable parameters), owing to the vector neuron representation. The dimension of the final output features is set to 256 , same as baselines. We chose 200 

eigenbases of the LBO and 30 eigenbases of the connection Laplacian for computing C and Q respectively. All hyper-parameters λ in the total loss are set as 1.0, except λ2 and 

λ5 to be 0.1.

Datasets. To study the performance under near-isometric deformation, we use SCAPE [1], FAUST [8] and SHREC19 [41]. The SCAPE dataset contains a single per-son in 71 different poses, where the train/test split is 51/20. The FAUST dataset contains 10 persons in 10 different poses, leading to a total of 100 shapes, which are split into 80/20 for training and testing. The challenging SHREC19 dataset contains 44 human shapes with different mesh con-nectivity and is only used as a test set. For non-isometric cases, we consider the SMAL [70] and DT4D [38] datasets. SMAL contains 49 four-legged animal shapes of 8 species, from which 5 are used for training and 3 unseen species for testing, resulting in a 29/20 split [22]. The DT4D dataset contains challenging humanoid shapes with large non-isometric deformation across different shape classes. Following [11, 22], we employ 9 different classes of humanoid shapes, resulting in a split of 198/95 shapes. For real-world scan, we utilize the FAUSTSCAN [8] training dataset, which is the raw scan to create the regis-tered FAUST dataset. The FAUSTSCAN training dataset contains a total of 100 shapes with 10 people in 10 dif-ferent poses, which is split in the same way for train/test as FAUST. Since it is real-world captured human scans, it has the typical artifacts of missing parts due to occlusion or lack of sensor coverage and scan noise. We subsample the shapes to a resolution of ∼ 5k vertices for all evaluated methods. We further stress test our method using a customized non-manifold version of FAUST, which is a dedicated non-manifold test set derived from the original test partition (20 test shapes), where half the shapes are decimated (#vertex reduced from 5k to 3k). For partial shape matching, we employ SHREC16-Partiality [17, 25]. It has two sub-datasets, namely CUTS and HOLES, representing different partial modalities. It contains 120 training and 153 testing shapes for CUTS; 80 training and 200 testing shapes for HOLES, respectively. 

Computational complexity. The performance metrics, including the number of trainable parameters and mean run-time on the SMAL test set, are detailed in Tab. 5. For a fair comparison, we employ the same computation unit with four Intel Xeon E5-2697 CPU and one NVIDIA TI-TAN Xp GPU consistently for all methods. Our model es-tablishes a new frontier by being both significantly smaller (approximately 30% fewer parameters than the next-best method) and substantially more accurate (half of the error of the closest competitor). While the current implementa-tion demonstrates a marginal increase in runtime, it oper-ates within the competitive range of all other methods, re-quiring less than 0.1 seconds to process a shape pair with over 5k vertices. This performance gap could be effectively mitigated through the development of a CUDA-accelerated implementation of the VN-layers. 

# 11. Additional Experiments 

11.1. xyz versus wks 

Existing methods, including URSSM and HbrFM, demon-strate a selective preference for shape descriptors. Specif-ically, they employ xyz coordinates for the SMAL and SHREC16-Partiality datasets, but utilize wks for others, such as SCAPE and FAUST. This differentiation is likely necessitated by the significant non-isometries inherent in SMAL and SHREC16-Partiality, which inherently reduce the stability of wks. To rigorously analyze this effect, we calculated the mean values of the feature channels across semantically corresponding points for all shapes in both the SMAL and SCAPE datasets. The empirical evidence in Fig. 13 confirms that wks possesses a higher variance within SMAL than within SCAPE, whereas the xyz coor-dinate shows greater consistency. The inherent ability of xyz to represent raw shape geometries makes it a com-pelling choice for purely data-driven 3D learning in both research and practical applications. 

11.2. Near-Isometric Matching 

We compare performance on the near-isometric datasets SCAPE, FAUST and SHREC19 using both xyz and wks as input features. Specifically, we train on SCAPE and FAUST, and test across all three datasets, with quantitative results shown in Fig. 12. While all methods perform well when utilizing wks, ours is uniquely effective when relying solely on xyz, underscoring its extraordinary robustness to input type and its ability to learn salient shape information directly from raw data. This represents, to our knowledge, the first instance where xyz has achieved competitive re-sults, if not better, against wks for near-isometric shapes.          

> 510 15 20
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Feat. Channel (wks)
> Feat. Mean
> XYZ
> -0.6
> -0.3
> 0
> 0.3
> 0.6
> Feat. Channel (xyz)
> Figure 13. Statistics of wks vs. xyz. The box plot illustrates the statistical distribution of the mean feature channel values at seman-tically corresponding points across the entire shape collections of the SMAL and SCAPE datasets. The methodology involved ag-gregating the channel-wise mean of features across corresponding points for every shape, yielding a feature matrix (with dimensions #correspondences ×#feature channels), where each column’s dis-tribution is plotted as a box. The statistics shown for the 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th wks channels demonstrate a pronounced difference in behavior between the datasets. Specifically, the wks statistics for SMAL display a substantially larger variance than those for SCAPE. This higher dispersion is a direct consequence of the non-isometries present in the SMAL dataset, which contrasts sharply with the stability observed in the xyz descriptor statistics.

FAUST FAUST non-manifold 

URSSM(wks) 1.6 17.6 HbrFM(wks) 1.4 16.6 Ours(wks) 1.6 15.6 Ours(xyz) 1.6 2.7  

> Table 6. MGeoErr( ↓) on FAUST non-manifold shapes.

The high performance of baselines using wks also suggests that the near-isometric matching task has been addressed very well, hinting that the community should shift focus to more challenging non-isometric and real-world cases. The experiments also show that RINO generalized well across different datasets, suggesting that equivariance/invariance does not hinder generalization. Furthermore, the shapes in SHREC19 have all different discretizations, ours performs well in this challenging scenario under both xyz and wks as input features. Despite the discretization-dependent VN-EdgeConv operation at the beginning of RINO, the subse-quent RINONet block learn adaptive diffusion time accord-ingly, rendering the entire RINONet robust to varying dis-cretizations. 

11.3. Matching Non-manifold Shapes 

To underscore the advantage of directly processing raw ge-ometry, we evaluate models pre-trained on FAUST against our customized FAUST non-manifold test set. Note that this setup violates the “nice mesh” assumption required by intrinsic descriptors like wks. Consequently, as shown in Tab. 6, methods relying on wks as input suffer a significant Figure 14. Non-manifold shape matching. Methods employing the wks as input exhibit a significant performance deterioration, even for SoTA methods such as URSSM and HbrFM, an observa-tion that also applies to our proposed method (Ours+wks). Fortu-nately, our SO(3)-invariance network allows for effective learning directly from the raw xyz coordinates (Ours). This approach of-fers robustness against the difficulties posed by non-manifoldness, bypassing the fragility observed when using wks. 

decline in matching performance. Crucially, our proposed method, when directly utilizing the raw xyz coordinates, ex-hibits remarkable robustness with only a negligible perfor-mance degradation. This result highlights the enhanced ro-bustness conferred by xyz input when confronting the topo-logical complexities of non-manifold and highly discrepant data. See Fig. 14 for visual examples. 

11.4. Real-World Scans 

To evaluate all methods under real-world scans, we utilize the FAUSTSCAN training dataset, which contains typical artifacts of missing parts due to occlusion or lack of sensor coverage and scan noise. We reduce scan vertices to 5k, due to the computation of LBO and its eigendecomposition, and no further preprocessing is performed to preserve the noise, holes and artifacts in the original scans. The quantitative re-sults are reported in Tab. 2 (col. FSCAN). Ours performs all baselines regardless of input features and qualitative results are illustrated in Fig. 22. This strong performance suggests a big step towards shape matching methods for real-world applications. 

11.5. Human Segmentation 

We compare against the SoTA DiffusionNet [54] across two feature inputs: hks and xyz. The results in Tab. 7 show that our proposed method achieves comparable accu-racy to DiffusionNet when using hks. The key distinction 

Method Human dataset [40] 

DiffusionNet(hks, w/o aug) 91.3% Ours(hks, w/o aug) 91.0% DiffusionNet(xyz, w/ aug) 90.3% DiffusionNet(xyz, w/o aug) 83.6% Ours(xyz, w/ aug) 90.6% Ours(xyz, w/o aug) 90.1%  

> Table 7. Segmentation accuracy ( ↑) on human dataset [40].

No. Ablation Setting SMAL 

1 w\o Lstruct 7.3 2 w\o Lcouple 7.6 3 w\o Lcontr 5.7 4 w\o the Qmaps branch 5.1 5 w\o LΠQ 5.0 6 Ours + coupling C, Q 26.9 7 Ours 4.6  

> Table 8. Ablation study on SMAL.

arises with raw xyz input: RINONet exhibits complete sta-bility, maintaining its performance with or without SO(3)-augmentation during training, whereas DiffusionNet suffers a substantial degradation when augmentation is removed. This robust, stable performance stems directly from the in-built SO(3)-invariance of our architecture, which simplifies the training pipeline and translates to enhanced training ef-ficiency. In Fig. 15 we present additional qualitative results. 

11.6. RNA Segmentation 

To test RINO on other diverse data modalities, we train it on RNA dataset [46] with the same training protocol as Dif-fusionNet (i.e. the I/I setting). RINONet achieves 85 .8% 

accuracy, versus 72 .1% of DiffusionNet (cf. Fig. 16). 

11.7. Rigid Registration 

As a proof-of-concept, we train RINO on the Stanford Bunny dataset [60], predicting per-point SO(3)-invariant features. More specifically, we take two bunnies of different resolution and randomly rotate one of them. Then, a cor-respondence search is conducted in the feature space, and the rigid registration is computed using Procrustes Analy-sis. Our final mean geodesic error of correspondences is 

2.4, and the Chamfer distance is 0.018 . A visual result is shown in Fig. 17. 

11.8. Ablation 

We ablate the design of both our architecture and loss terms, and report the results on the challenging non-isometric SMAL dataset in Tab. 8. To this end, we compare each Figure 15. Human Segmentation. We show the segmentation results of DiffusionNet and our RINONet on the composite dataset [40]. Our RINONet produces sharper and more semantically meaningful segments. 

Figure 16. RNA segmentation 

Figure 17. 3D rigid registration on Stanford dataset (bunny) 

row with the last row (our full model) to assess the impor-tance of individual terms. The performance degrades most when Lstruct or Lcouple is removed (first 2 rows), indicat-ing the central role of structural property and consistency of different map representations. Interestingly, this find-ing echoes with previous works [11, 49, 50]. Removing the Lcontr term has a moderate impact on the final results, since it helps to learn more distinctive rotation-invariant fea-tures. Looking at the fourth and fifth rows, we conclude that 

Figure 19. Backbone comparison. Spider emoji denotes Diffu-sionNet and rhinoceros emoji denotes RINONet.                             

> mGeoErr ( ↓)DUOFM CnsFM URSSM HbrFM (i) DiffusionNet 25.2 9.1 24.8 26.4 RINONet 5.7 7.3 5.1 7.4
> (ii) SCAPE FAUST SMAL DT4D DiffusionNet 26.9 30.0 24.8 59.3 RINONet 2.0 1.6 5.1 5.9 RINONet + CFMaps 2.0 1.5 4.6 5.3

Table 9. Ablation: SO(3)-invariant features & CFMaps 

the integration of complex functional maps encourages the first-order consistency of rotation-invariant features, which in turn helps to improve the accuracy of estimated corre-spondences. Finally, comparing the last two rows shows that excessive coupling can hinder learning performance. To study the relative performance gain of invariant fea-tures and CFMaps, we ablate further in Tab. 9 by two exper-iments under the SO(3)/SO(3) setup. (i) We take baselines and swap in our RINONet as the feature extractor and ex-periment on SMAL; RINONet always improves over Dif-fusionNet, highlighting the benefit of SO(3)-invariant fea-tures. (cf. Fig. 19) (ii) We compare DiffusionNet and RI-NONet without CFMaps, and RINONet with CFMaps, training them on four different datasets, showing that the largest performance gain comes from SO(3)-invariant fea-tures, which can be further improved by CFMaps. 11.9. More Qualitative Results 

We show more matching results of RINO on the challenging noisy shapes in Fig. 20, and ours is the only method that can produce reliable correspondences under the noise level 

σ = 6 e-3, where baselines already start to produce spurious correspondences. We also present additional qualitative results on the SHREC16-Partiality datasets. Here we show all partial shapes of all categories in Fig. 23-36, and RINO manifests strong robustness under this challenging incomplete shape by directly consuming the raw 3D geometry. The highly accurate correspondences suggest remarkable quality of the learned rotation-invariant features. 

11.10. Failure Cases 

We notice that for highly non-isometric pairs, our esti-mated correspondences are sometimes locally non-smooth. As shown in Fig. 21, RINO confuses when one humanoid misses completely his lower arm. This leads to wrong cor-respondences in the region of missing parts in the other shape. We hypothesize that incorporating further intrinsic prior during training or post-processing could solve these artifacts.   

> Figure 21. Failure cases.
> Figure 20. Matching shapes with Gaussian perturbation.

Figure 22. Qualitative results on the real-world FAUSTSCAN. Figure 23. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS cat 

Figure 24. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS david Figure 25. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS centaur 

Figure 26. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS dog Figure 27. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS horse 

Figure 28. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS victoria Figure 29. SHREC16-Partiality CUTS michael Figure 30. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES cat Figure 31. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES david 

Figure 32. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES centaur Figure 33. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES dog 

Figure 34. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES horse Figure 35. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES victoria Figure 36. SHREC16-Partiality HOLES michael