Title: Image to Plant Architecture Paper_Submission_arxiv

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22622v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 00:21:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# A Vision Language Model for Generating 

# Procedural Plant Architecture 

# Representations from Simulated Images 

Heesup Yun a, Isaac Kazuo Uyehara b, Ioannis Droutsas d, Earl Ranario a,

Christine H. Diepenbrock b, Brian N. Bailey b, *, J. Mason Earles a,c, * 

> a

Biological and Agricultural Engineering, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 95616, CA, USA  

> b

Department of Plant Sciences, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 95616, CA, USA  

> c

Viticulture and Enology, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 95616, CA, USA  

> d

Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 9101, 6700 HB Wageningen, The Netherlands 

*Corresponding authors 

# Abstract 

Three -dimensional (3D) procedural plant architecture models have emerged as an important tool 

for simulation -based studies of plant structure and function, extracting plant architectural 

parameters from field measurements, and for generating realistic plan ts in computer graphics. 

However, measuring the architectural parameters for these models at the field and population 

scales remains prohibitively labor -intensive. We present a novel algorithm that generates the 3D 

plant architecture from an image, to crea te a functional structural plant model from an image that 

reflects organ -level geometric and topological parameters, providing a more comprehensive 

representation of the plant's architecture. Instead of using 3D sensors or processing multi -view 

images with computer vision to obtain the 3D structure of plants, we proposed a method that 

generates token sequences containing a procedural definition of the plant architecture. This work 

utilized only synthetic images for training and testing, where “exact” archit ectural parameters 

were known, which allowed for testing of the hypothesis that organ -level architectural parameters could be extracted from imagery data using a vision language model (VLM). A 

synthetic dataset of cowpea plant images was generated using the Helios 3D plant simulator, 

with the detailed plant architecture encoded in XML files. We developed a pla nt architecture 

tokenizer for the XML file defining plant architecture, converting it into a token sequence that a 

language model can predict. Then, a VLM was trained to predict plant architecture token 

sequences from images. Our results demonstrated that the model can predict plant architecture 

tokens with an F1 score of 0.73 in a teacher -forcing scenario. Evaluation of the model was 

performed through autoregressive generation, achieving a BLEU -4 score of 94.00% and a 

ROUGE -L score of 0.5182. Our model out performed feature regression -based methods in 

estimating bulk plant -level traits that require understanding of the occluded 3D structure of the 

plant, such as leaf count and leaf area. This led to the conclusion that such plant architecture 

model generatio n and parameter extraction were possible based on synthetic images, and thus, 

future work will be performed to extend the approach to real imagery data. 

Keywords : Plant architecture, Plant modeling, Vision language model, Digital agriculture, 

Synthetic data 

# Introduction 

Understanding the three -dimensional (3D) structure of plants is necessary to understand the 

efficiency of plant light utilization for canopy photosynthesis and net primary production 

(Burgess et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022). Also, the 3D structure of pla nts plays a crucial role in 

quantitatively analyzing how these structural characteristics affect yield and associated 

relationships with genes, ultimately allowing for more efficient selection of varieties. For 

example, modern corn varieties have more vert ical leaf angles compared to older varieties, 

allowing them to be planted at higher densities in a smaller area while still allowing light to 

reach the lower leaves (Duvick et al., 2003; Elli et al., 2023; Hammer et al., 2009). Olorunwa et 

al. (2022) measu red plant height, node number, and leaf number, and demonstrated the effect of 

waterlogging on cowpea genotypes. Digrado et al. (2020) reported that canopy architectural traits 

contributed to 38.6% of the variance observed in the canopy photosynthesis of c owpea crops. Plant height and stem diameter of rice plants affect the resistance to high wind, reducing damage 

from lodging caused by typhoons (Kashiwagi and Ishimaru, 2004; Wu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 

2023). Plant structure also affects how they compete for space wi th surrounding plants, as well 

as their growth over time (Ford, 2014). 

While conventional 3D scanning of plants using LiDAR scanners or a structure from motion 

algorithm mainly focuses on capturing bulk plant geometry (Li et al., 2025), functional structural 

plant models (FSPMs) integrate a 3D representation of plant architec ture at the organ level with 

biophysical modeling of plant function (Sievänen et al., 2014; Soualiou et al., 2021). These 

benefits enable the creation of a plant model that accurately reflects the characteristics of real 

plants and facilitate the analysis of target phenotypes of focus in breeding, which can inform the 

development of improved genotypes (Yu et al., 2023). 

There have been various studies to represent FSPMs based on reproducible syntax. Plant 

modeling methods rooted in L -systems (Lindenmayer, 1968a, 1968b), such as L -Studio 

(Karwowski and Prusinkiewicz, 2004), L -Peach (Allen et al., 2005), and XL (Kurth and O ng, 

2017), define plant architecture based on the node -edge structure of L -systems and add 

parameters related to plant organs. Schnepf et al. (2018) developed a method of modeling 

individual roots as objects using object -oriented design, and CPlantBox (Dig rado et al., 2020) 

extended this to the entire plant, storing the plant’s structure as an extensible markup language 

(XML) file to perform functional structural modeling and water and carbon flows simulations. 

Yun and Kim (2023) developed CropBox, a crop m odeling software that provides a high -level 

approach to define FSPM using the Julia programming language. For plants with one or two 

branches, such as early vegetative plants, FSPMs can be tuned to closely reproduce the structure 

of actual plants in the fi eld. However, defining the architecture and organ parameters of more 

complex and self -occluded plants becomes prohibitively difficult. Therefore, an alternative 

method that reduces the time and cost of generating FSPMs for a complex plant is needed. 

Recent development of vision language models (VLMs) that can understand images and 

reproduce structured output, such as comma -separated values (CSV), XML, and programming 

languages, has shown feasibility for generating structured output for 3D objects and shapes. For 

example, Wang et al. (2024) introduced the LLaMA -Mesh algorithm, which is a vision language 

model that generates a sequence of natural language tokens defining 3D vertices and faces from an image. Since the methodology used in LLaMA -Mesh suggests the concept of generating 

language tokens defining 3D structure using conventional VLMs, it could be a potential solution 

that can reduce the time and cost of generating a structured plant archite cture string. However, 

up until now, algorithms that use VLMs to generate structured output defining the plant 

architecture from images have not yet been tested. 

Therefore, this research demonstrates the fundamental viability of generating procedurally 

defined plant models from plant images using a VLM, offering both the plant architecture 

tokenization approach and the dataset necessary for predicting and generatin g plant structure. 

The main contributions of this work are the development of a tokenization method for plant 

architecture models and the validation of a hypothesis that a VLM can generate plant architecture 

models using advanced synthetic training data th at incorporates foundational knowledge of plant 

architectures. The use of synthetic training data not only provides an accurate benchmark for 

evaluating model training but also accelerates dataset generation, as obtaining such a benchmark 

is practically in feasible through real -world field experiments. This work lays the foundation for 

developing larger, modern VLMs to generate plant architecture models with more 

comprehensive training data in the future. 

# Materials and methods 

# Plant architecture model 

The typical structure of a dicotyledon plant in vegetative growth consists of a shoot and a root 

system. This work focused on modeling the shoot system, which consists of internodes, petioles, 

and leaves. In reproductive growth, plants produce flowers, fru its, and seeds, changing the 

resource allocation and their branching pattern. In this paper, generating plants during vegetative 

growth was demonstrated, and generating plants in the reproductive state will be done in a future 

study. The basic plant archit ectural unit in the model is the phytomer, which consists of an 

internode with one or more petioles at its end, and each petiole contains one or more leaves 

(Teichmann and Muhr, 2015). Shoots are formed by connecting multiple phytomers end -to -end, which occurs when the vegetative bud at the shoot tip develops into a new phytomer (i.e., 

“growth”). Shoots can spawn lateral child shoots from vegetative buds, which are located where 

the internode and petiole are attached, creating a nested topological s tructure. For example, Fig. 

1 (a) shows an actual cowpea plant, and Fig. 1 (b) represents the corresponding topological 

diagram. Knowing the order and relationship between each plant organ allows us to implement 

the actual 3D plant structure in a simulatio n program. 

In this work, the Helios plant simulation framework was used to generate randomly varying 

cowpea plants based on its architectural model. Bailey (2019) developed Helios, a scalable 3D 

plant and environmental biophysical modeling framework. This framework i s implemented in 

C++ and incorporates sub -models, known as plugins. Helios can simulate various types of plant 

biophysical processes, including energy balance, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), and 

photosynthesis simulations, based on 3D geometry and ray tracing. It is possible to simulate 

plant structure and growth and output the full plant structure in XML file format using the plant 

architecture plug -in. 

Figure 1. Schematic depiction of how model plant architecture is defined from real plants. 

(a) Cowpea plant in its early growth stage (b) Simplified diagram with plant organ 

annotations (c) Example plant architecture XML created based on the annotations (d) 

Renderin g of the plant architecture XML using the Helios simulator 

The plant architecture can be encoded in an XML file format, which uniquely parameterizes the 

topology and geometry of plant organs. The XML file contains two types of plant architectural 

information: the relative connectivity of plant organs (i.e., topolo gy) and the parameters defining the geometry of each plant organ. The relative connectivity of plant organs is defined by the 

order in which the plant organs are defined in the XML syntax and the ID of the parent instance. 

For example, the parameter set defining a shoot has the shoot’s u nique ID and information about 

the parent node where the shoot is located. The parameters defining the shape of each plant 

organ include length, diameter, scale, angle, etc., depending on the type of plant organ, and 

define the individual geometric charact eristics of the plant organ. Table 1 summarizes the plant 

architectural parameters used in the Helios plant architecture XML structure. The XML files 

include base positions and plant age as comprehensive plant -level parameters. The parameters 

defining a sh oot encompass the shoot type along with its rotational parameters. The internode 

parameters provide geometric information, such as length, radius, pitch, and phyllotactic angle. 

Connecting the leaf to the internode, the petiole is characterized by paramete rs that specify its 

length, radius, pitch, curvature, and scale. Lastly, each leaf is associated with a scale parameter 

that determines its size, in addition to pitch, yaw, and roll angles, which indicate its angle 

transformation from the parent organ’s co ordinate system. Collectively, these elements provide a 

comprehensive representation of the plant's structure and are defined for each geometric element. 

There are two approaches to generating the architecture of a plant via an XML file. The first 

approach involves manually creating the plant structure and writing it directly to an XML file, 

which can then be read into Helios to generate the plant geometry. Fig. 1 (c) is an example of a 

plant architecture XML file based on a real plant, and Fig. 1 (d) shows the rendering of this using 

the Helios program. The second way is to generate the plant architecture dynamically and 

procedurally based on the Helios pla nt architecture plug -in. The plug -in can automatically 

generate a plant architecture model of a specific plant growth stage, simulate plant growth, and 

modify the plant architecture model by pre -defined rules and random sampling from the 

parameter distribu tion of plant organs. Therefore, even with the same plant age and base rotation, 

generated plant architectures have different branching structures and shapes. 

# Synthetic cowpea dataset 

It is necessary to have ground -truth annotations of the plant architecture corresponding to the 

plant images to predict the plant architecture from images using VLMs. However, acquiring a large -scale agricultural image dataset with high -quality annotations is costly and time -

consuming, which can limit algorithm development (Dyrstad and Øye, 2025). To overcome these 

difficulties, synthetic data generated by simulation programs can be utilize d. 

A dataset consisting of 3D cowpea plant models was procedurally generated based on randomly 

varying architectural parameters following a specified distribution (Table 1). The dataset was 

generated using the procedural plant architecture model in Helios v1. 3.14, which is described in 

more detail in the previous section. During the dataset generation process, consistent random 

seeds were assigned to each plant, based on the generated plant index for reproducibility (Fig. 2 

(a)). The growth of the crop was sim ulated by creating a plant on day 0 using the Helios Cowpea 

library and then advancing it over time to day 39 (Fig. 2 (b) and (c)). All simulated cowpea 

plants in this dataset were in the vegetative growth stage, simplifying the problem definition by 

gener ating a plant architecture model without reproductive organs. The distributions of plant 

organ parameters are defined within the Helios library and can be customized by the user. For 

the generation of this dataset, the default parameter distributions defin ed in the library were used. 

As a result, the generated plant architecture dataset represents an imaginary population of 

cowpea plants that were sampled from specific parameter distributions. 10,000 random seeds 

were used to generate the day 0 plant, and p lant growth was simulated on a daily basis up to day 

39. Therefore, a total of 10,000x40 = 400,000 simulated images and plant architecture XML 

pairs were generated. Additionally, for multi -view dataset generation, images at azimuthal 

viewing angles of 0°, 120°, and 240° were also rendered for each XML file (Fig. 2 (d)). 

Table 1 List of plant architectural parameters from Helios plant architecture plug -in. The default 

values and parameter distributions are used from Helios Cowpea library. More detailed 

information can be found 

here; https://baileylab.ucdavis.edu/software/helios/_plant_architecture_doc.html 

Parameter Description Values and distributions Units 

base_rotation_pitch Plant rotation (pitch) Uniform(0, 10) deg. 

base_rotation_yaw Plant rotation (yaw) Uniform(0, 360) deg. 

base_rotation_roll Plant rotation (roll) Uniform(0, 360) deg. 

plant_age Days after 

germination 

Uniform(0, 39) days 

shoot_type_label Shoot types based on 

leaf composition 

Unifoliate: Constant(1) 

Trifoliate: Constant(3) 

index Parameter Description Values and distributions Units 

shoot_base_pitch Shoot base pitch 

angle 

Unifoliate: Constant(40) 

Trifoliate: Uniform(40, 60) 

deg. 

shoot_base_yaw Shoot base yaw angle Unifoliate: Uniform(0, 360) 

Trifoliate: Uniform( -20, 20) 

deg. 

shoot_base_roll Shoot base roll angle Constant(90) deg. 

internode_length Initial internode 

length 

Constant(0.002) m

internode_radius Initial internode 

radius 

Constant(0.0015) m

internode_pitch Internode pitch angle Unifoliate: Constant(0) 

Trifoliate: Constant(20) 

deg. 

internode_phyllotacti 

c_angle 

Phyllotactic angle Uniform(145, 215) deg. 

petiole_length Petiole length Unifoliate: Constant(0.0004) 

Trifoliate: Uniform(0.06, 0.08) 

m

petiole_radius Petiole radius Unifoliate: Constant(0.0001) 

Trifoliate: Constant( 0.0018) 

m

petiole_pitch Petiole pitch angle Unifoliate: Uniform(60, 80) 

Trifoliate: Uniform(45, 60) 

deg. 

petiole_curvature Petiole curvature Trifoliate: Uniform( -200, -50) deg. 

leaflet_scale Leaflet size scale Trifoliate: Constant(0.9) 

leaf_scale Leaf size scale Unifoliate: Constant(0.02) 

Trifoliate: Uniform(0.09,0.12) 

leaf_pitch Leaf pitch angle Unifoliate: Uniform( -10, 10) 

Trifoliate: Normal(45, 20) 

deg. 

leaf_yaw Leaf yaw angle Unifoliate: Constant(0) 

Trifoliate: Constant(10) 

deg. 

leaf_roll Leaf roll angle Constant( -15) deg. Figure 2. Process of generating a synthetic cowpea plant architecture dataset. We set the 

random seed (a) for repeatability and generated plant architecture (b). (c) Then, we 

advanced time to simulate plant growth (d), and optionally rendered side -view images. 

# Plant architecture tokenizations 

Helios can encode and decode XML files (Fig. 1(c)), a structured document format that enables 

the export or import of plant architecture models to interface with the Helios program. While this 

text -based format can be used to train a VLM, processing XML fi les requires an intermediate 

step that converts the structured text into embedding vectors from which the model can learn. 

However, applying a conventional text tokenization method t o an XML text is inefficient 

because the XML file structure and elements, such as opening and closing tags with special 

characters, unnecessarily increase the sequence lengt h that requires a larger context length for 

language models, resulting in a larger memory footprint and reduced generation performance. Therefore, a new method was needed to streamline the XML file to essential plant architecture 

model information. I n this paper , a specialized plant architecture tokenizer was developed, 

representing the plant organs and parameters as tokens. 

The XML file contains information on a series of plant organs with a hierarchical structure, 

which can be represented by their organ token and the following parameter tokens using the 

plant architecture tokenizer. The plant organ tokens include the branchi ng order in which the 

organ is attached, as well as the type of organ. This preserves the hierarchy and sequential 

relationship between plant organs and makes the plant architecture token sequence semantically 

identical with the original XML file, which en ables conversion between the two formats without 

information loss. 

Fig. 3 illustrates an example of tokenizing plant architecture into a sequence of tokens. The first 

shoot tag is tokenized as “00”, where the leading 0 indicates the primary branch, and the trailing 

0 represents the shoot organ. Next, the phytomer structur es of internode, petiole, and leaves 

appear repeatedly. Similarly, the trailing number represents 1: internode, 2: petiole, 3: leaf. 

Therefore, the internode connected to the primary branch is tokenized as "01," and the petiole 

attached to this internode i s tokenized as "02". Since the initial leaves connected to the primary 

branch are unifoliate, each leaf is attached to a single petiole, which is tokenized to "03". The 

shoot organ corresponding to the secondary branch connected to internode "01" is tokeni zed as 

"10", and the internode and petiole connected to this node are tokenized as "11" and "12", 

respectively. Since the leaves attached to the petioles after the first unifoliate leaves have a 

trifoliate configuration, each leaf is tokenized as "13", "14 ", and "15". Parameter tokens defining 

the plant organ’s geometry follow the plant organ token, represented as p0 through p3 or p4, 

depending on the number of parameters per plant organ. This rule is applied recursively until all 

the plant organs are descr ibed. Combining all of this together, the plant architecture defined in 

Fig. 3(a) can be tokenized as shown in Fig. 3(d). 

After converting the plant architecture XML to a token sequence, it is converted to categorical 

variables, which are token IDs that the transformer can predict, using a table shown in Fig. 3 (c). 

First, for the plant organ token, the branching order was mu ltiplied by 6, and the organ type was 

added to make the token IDs. Next, the parameter values are converted to the token IDs. Because 

conventional tokenizers don’t have specific token dictionaries for decimal point values, they can’t convert the plant parameter token value into a single token ID. Therefore, a quantization 

method was applied to convert the parameter values to discrete integer values between 24 and 

222, considering varying scales and distributions. To ensure a simi lar resolution across various 

scales and reduce the size of token dictionaries, combinations of a set of constant values and 

linearly spaced float grids were applied. For example, 0, -10, 10, and 90 degrees are frequently 

observed numbers in angle paramete rs. Also, 1 and 3 are used to represent the shoot organ that 

has unifoliate leaves or trifoliate leaves. As a result, those constant values are added to the 

mapping between parameter token values to token IDs. Besides constant values, linearly spaced 

grids were applied. This includes angle representations of [ -40, 360] in degrees in 2.5 -degree 

resolution. The set of decimal values was created by defining 10 evenly spaced samples within 

the ranges [0.1, 1.0], [0.01, 0.1], [0.001, 0.01], and [0.0001, 0.001] i n meters to represent organ 

parameters with small decimal point values. This set of constant values and float value grids was 

concatenated and used to find the closest index of a certain parameter value, which can be 

mapped to a token ID. Figure 3. An example of plant architecture annotations and tokenizations . (a) shows a 

simplified plant architecture diagram based on an input XML file and (b) plant organ 

annotation rules. The Table (c) shows the rules converting plant organ annotations and 

float values of plant organ parameters to unique integer values. (d) s hows plant 

architecture tokens of example plant architecture, which can also be represented in XML 

file format. (e) shows the sequence with special tokens for VLM training. (f) shows the 

token IDs that the model actually predicts as categorical variables. 

Since the plant size information was lost if the input image was cropped and resized during the 

image preprocessing step , the plant’s width and height in meters in the original image were estimated and concatenated in the input token string . Additionally, the vegetation fraction, which 

represents the proportion of the image window covered by vegetation , was also calculated and 

included as plant metadata. This plant metadata was encapsulated with <META> tokens and 

added at the start of the plant architecture tokens. Next, a <SOS> token indicating the beginning 

of the sentence and an <EOS> token indicatin g the end of the sentence were added to the 

beginning and end of the sequence. Fig. 3(e) shows an example with plant metadata tokens, 

including start and end tokens, and Fig. 3(f) shows the final input token IDs, ready for training 

the language model decoder .

# Algorithm structure 

After tokenizing the plant architecture XML into a token sequence, the model was trained to 

perform the next token prediction (NTP) task in a teacher -forcing scenario. Fig. 4 shows the 

overall algorithm structure. As mentioned in the previous section, the input image was cropped 

around the plant and resized to 224 2 or 448 2 based on the model configuration. In addition, the 

plant size information is quantized and concatenated to the beginning of the input token IDs. The 

NTP tasks estimated the next token starting from the SOS token and plant metadata tokens to 

complete the p lant architecture token sequence. The target token sequence was one token shifted 

to predict the start of the metadata token to the EOS token. 

The model and training code were implemented in Python programming language based on the 

Hugging Face ( https://huggingface.co ) library’s vision encoder -decoder model, which consists of 

layers of transformer encoder and decoder blocks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 

2021). A vision foundation model DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024) was utilized with its weights 

frozen to ser ve as a feature extractor, thereby maintaining generalization performance and 

reducing training time. The vision encoder’s patch embedding sequence was connected to the 

decoder’s cross -attention layer to perform the NTP task with a vision context. The deco der 

block’s configuration follows the GPT -2 model series. Figure 4. Proposed algorithm structure for the next token prediction task from an image. A 

plant architecture XML was visualized by a plant simulator to create an input image for 

the model, and tokenized to provide a ground truth token sequence. The preprocess block 

cropped the input image around the plant, resized it to the vision encoder input size, and 

saved the original plant size information, which is plant metadata. The tokenize block for 

plant metadata converts plant metadata to input token IDs and concatenate s them after 

the SOS token (red). The vision encoder block extracted visual features from the 

preprocessed image and was connected to the encoder -decoder cross -attention layer of 

the language model decoder . The target sequence was one token shifted, and the EOS 

token (purple) was added at the end of the sequence to train the language model decoder 

in a teacher -forcing scenario. 

# Model training procedure 

To examine the performance differences based on the number of parameters in the vision 

encoder and language decoder within the vision encoder -decoder model, two combinations of 

vision encoders (ViT -S, 21M parameters; and ViT -B, 86M parameters) and two lang uage decoders (gpt -2, 115M parameters; and gpt -2-medium, 406M parameters) were tested. 

Additionally, to understand how the amount of information affects plant architecture generation 

performance, training was conducted using both top -view images and multi -view images, which 

include side -view images, with combined input images resized to 224 and 448 pixels in width 

and height for the training dataset. Consequently, a total of 16 different model combinations 

were trained, and their evaluation metrics were calculat ed. 

During the training process, 80% of the dataset was used as training data, 10% as validation data, 

and 10% was reserved as a test dataset. To increase stability in the early stages of training 

(Hägele et al., 2024), the learning rate was gradually increased from 0 to 10 -4, reaching 20% of 

the total training steps, and then linearly decreased to 0 for the remaining steps to complete the 

training. The training batch size was 16, and the gradient accumulation size was set to 4, 

resulting in an effective batch size of 64. Training was conducted to minimize the cross -entropy 

loss function and was carried out on an NVIDIA A100 GPU for 4 epochs .

The accuracy and weighted F1 score were monitored in a teacher -forcing scenario during the 

model training, where the model estimates the n th token given the previous true (n -1) th tokens. 

The training accuracy of plant architecture tokens was calculated using the numbers of true 

positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false negatives (FN), and false positives (FP) between the 

predicted n th token from 1 to (n -1) th token sequence and the true n th token. 

𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 

𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃 

The weighted F1 score was calculated as the harmonic mean of precision and recall weighted by 

the percentage of token IDs. For example, for a token k, the precision and recall can be 

calculated below 

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜 𝑛 ! = "#!

> "#!$%#!

,

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑙 ! = "#!

> "#!$%&!

,

𝐹 1! = '×#)*+,-,. /!×0*+12 2!

> #)*+,-,. /!$0*+12 2!

.

The weighted F1 score was calculated using the weighted F1 score equation 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔 ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐹 1 = 3 

> ∑""#
> !$%/!

∑''5  

> !67

𝑛 !𝐹 1!.

# Model evaluation metrics 

In the model evaluation stage, the trained model generates plant architecture tokens from given 

SOS and plant metadata tokens with image context, also known as auto -regressive generation. 

Fig. 5 shows the overall evaluation process. As shown in Fig. 5 (b), the predicted token was then 

appended to the input token sequence, and this process continued until the EOS token was 

generated, thereby completing the plant architecture token sequence. A beam search with a beam 

size of 6 was employed to improve the gene ration result. 

Figure 5. Visualization of the model evaluation process. Red dotted arrows in (b) auto 

regressive generation mean the generated token will be appended to the end of the input 

token sequence. Generated plant architecture XML is visualized for qualitative 

evaluation. Plant bulk parameters are estimated in (a) the baseline method based on linear 

regression, and (c) the plant simulation -based method. Arrows flow in (a) baseline 

method that combines image features and plant metadata values. The arrow connected to the plant simulation represents a de -tokenized and recovered plant architecture XML file, 

which can be used for plant architecture model simulation. 

Unlike the teacher -forcing training, the generation results have varying lengths from the ground 

truth, resulting in different numbers of plant organs. Therefore, it is necessary to use evaluation 

metrics for comparing two sequences of different lengths. T o do this, the BLEU -4 score 

(Papineni et al., 2001) and ROUGE -L (Lin, 2004) were calculated. 

The bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU) score is a precision -based metric comparing token 

sequences between the generated and ground truth. Even if the metric is developed for machine 

translation evaluation, it can be extended to compare any two token s equences. The BLEU score 

counts how many n -gram patterns in a generated token sequence also appear in the ground truth 

token sequence. The N -grams are groups of N consecutive tokens within a token sequence. The 

1-gram BLUE score calculates the ratio of tok ens in the generated token sequence that are also 

present in the ground truth. Since plant organ tokens (i.e., “00”, “01”, “02”, … “35”) appeared at 

least once in the generated token sequence, the ratio of plant organ token in the generated token 

sequence, approximately 20% (1/5) between 17% (1/6) will be naive baseline for 1 -gram 

matching score if the generated token sequence have all the plant organ tokens but wrong plant 

parameter tokens. Similarly, if a correct combination of plant organ tokens with thr ee organ 

parameter tokens, or any consecutive combinations of four tokens, also appear in ground truth, it 

is counted as a 4 -gram matching. 

The BLEU -4 score is calculated by averaging 1 -gram, 2 -gram, 3 -gram, and 4 -gram matching 

scores. A higher BLEU -4 score implies that the generated tokens have common patterns with the 

ground truth. In other words, a lower BLEU -4 score means that the generate d token sequence has 

patterns that do not exist in the ground truth. For example, if the BLEU -4 score is 100%, it 

indicates a sufficient condition that all the patterns of the generated plant architecture tokens are 

present in the ground truth plant archit ecture token sequence. It also means that if the model 

generated only one branch with correct patterns, it can still show a high precision score. To 

prevent this, a brevity penalty is applied to penalize the sequence length of the generation result 

if it's shorter than the ground truth. 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈 4 = A1,𝑒𝑥𝑝 𝑒𝑥𝑝 A1 − ∑ 𝑙 8" 

∑ 𝑙 9*/ 

F F GH

> :
> /63

𝑛 − 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚 𝐵𝐿𝑈𝐸 J

> 3/:

ROUGE -L calculates the longest common subsequence (LCS) between the generated token 

sequence and the ground truth token sequence, and uses this to compute the F score. The 𝐹 <=> 

score for the i th sentence is calculated as follows: 

𝑅 <=> = <=> (8*/ ,8" ) 

> 2*/ (8*/ )

,

𝑃 <=> = <=> (8*/ ,8" ) 

> 2*/ (8" )

,

𝐹 <=> = B3$C"D0&'( #&'( 

> 0&'( $C# &'(

, 𝑤 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝛽 = 𝑃 <=> /𝑅 <=> .

The ROUGE -L score is the average of the 𝐹 <=> scores for N pairs of generated plant architecture 

token sequences and their corresponding ground truth plant architecture token sequences. A 

higher ROUGE -L score indicates that longer common token patterns are found between the 

generated plant architectu re token sequence and the ground truth plant architecture token 

sequence. If the ROUGE -L score is 1.0, it means that the generated plant architecture token 

sequence is the same as the ground truth plant architecture token sequence. Even if the ROUGE -

L scor e can show low scores for inverted sequences (i.e., same plant architecture with a swapped 

secondary branch) and paraphrased sequences (i.e., visually similar plant architecture but has 

negligible token offsets for every organ parameter), the score can be a metric that shows 

structural similarity and preservation of pivotal plant architecture patterns. 

The evaluation used 4,000 images from the dataset, which were not used during the training or 

validation step. The evaluation step was done after finishing the model training and validation 

for each model configuration. 

# Plant architecture parameter evaluations 

After the model evaluation, the best -performing model that achieved the highest BLEU -4 and 

ROUGE -L scores, as indicated in Table 2, was selected for a detailed evaluation in terms of plant architecture. First, we compared the tokens related to the plant's base rotation angles and plant 

age from the generated and the ground truth plant architectures. The base rotation angles are the 

primary branch’s rotation angles, which determine the plant' s overall rotation and other plant 

organs attached to it. The plant age indicates the number of days since germination in the 

simulation. In addition to the direct parameter comparison above, the distributions of the other 

organ parameters were compared to determine whether the generated plant architecture organ 

parameters followed the distribution of the ground truth. The parameter distributions were 

plotted as histograms, and the Wasserstein distance (WD) was computed to measure the 

differences between th e two distributions. Wasserstein distance is a method for measuring the 

distance between two probability distributions, defined as follows 

𝑊 EN𝑃 ), 𝑃 9O = N𝐸 (F,G)∼I [𝑑 (𝑥 , 𝑦 )E]O3/E.

When p = 1, it is referred to as the earth mover's distance, and a smaller value indicates that the 

two distributions can be matched at a lower cost. 

# Plant simulation -based trait evaluation 

Plant height, leaf count, leaf area, and leaf angle distribution are important factors that influence 

the photosynthetic and water -use efficiency of plants, also affecting yield and environmental 

resistance. For instance, Truong et al. (2015) utilized FSPM to demonstrate that differences in 

leaf angles can affect the amount of photosynthesis, which in turn can influence the yield of 

sorghum. Pele et al. (2016) reported that plant height, number of leaves per plant, stem diameter, 

and root dry mass of cowpea affect the drought susceptibility index. 

Calculating the number of plant organs, such as leaf count and number of nodes, can be done by 

analyzing the plant architecture sequence. However, estimating plant architectural traits such as 

plant height and leaf angle distribution directly from plant ar chitecture sequence is not possible 

because tokens are the basic building blocks of plant structure, not a simulated plant model. The 

angle of each leaf is influenced by the series of coordinate transforms defined by parameter 

tokens of the internode and p etiole from the first shoot to the leaf. Similarly, plant height is 

determined by a series of coordinate transforms and measured by the highest point above the ground. Therefore, the plant architecture sequences were loaded into a 3D plant model using a 

simulation program, and the final values were computed afterward (Fig. 5 (c)). 

A linear regression -based baseline method was tested to evaluate the accuracy of plant height, 

leaf count, and total leaf area that were indirectly calculated through plant architecture model 

simulation. The baseline method for predicting plant traits from an image was fitting linear 

regression models from image features and plant metadata (Fig. 5 (a)). While the regression 

models cannot predict the entire complex plant architecture token sequence, traits that represent a 

plant’s overall visual traits, such as plant height, leaf count, and leaf area, can be predicted with 

relatively high accuracy (Schiller et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2022). Therefore, 

linear regression models based on fully connected layers, using the ViT -B model as a fea ture 

extractor, were fitted to predict plant height, leaf count, and total leaf area as a baseline. 

# Results 

# Model training and evaluation results 

A total of 16 combinations of settings we re trained, including view information (top -view vs. 

multi -view), input image size (224 2 vs. 448 2 pixels ), size of vision encoder model (ViT -S vs. 

ViT -B), and size of text decoder model (gpt -2 vs. gpt -2-medium). Table 2 summarizes the 

training metrics, showing the accuracy and weighted F1 score. Overall, both the weighted F1 

scores showed values ranging from 0.72 to 0.73. In particular, the weighted F1 score and 

accuracy showed similar results regardless of the mo del size and input images. This indicates 

that, given the current data and model architecture under teacher forcing conditions, the 

maximum token prediction accuracy was approximately 0.73. 

Table 2 Training metrics for models with different encoder and decoder setups, across various 

viewing angles and input image sizes. The highest F1 score and accuracy are shown in bold .

Text Decoder 

gpt -2 gpt -2-medium View Input 

Size 

Vision 

Encoder 

Accuracy F1 Accuracy F1 

Top -

view 

only 

224 2 ViT -S 0.7277 0.7285 0.7282 0.7290 

ViT -B 0.7260 0.7271 0.7291 0.7309 

448 2 ViT -S 0.7269 0.7271 0.7301 0.7317 

ViT -B 0.7276 0.7286 0.7284 0.7294 

Multi -

view 224 2 ViT -S 0.7270 0.7278 0.7287 0.7288 

ViT -B 0.7297 0.7329 0.7288 0.7290 

448 2 ViT -S 0.7286 0.7292 0.7297 0.7306 

ViT -B 0.7283 0.7296 0.7290 0.7303 

As shown in Table 3, the combination of larger models in the auto -regressive generation process 

demonstrated better performance metrics. The BLEU -4 score was highest at 94.00% when 

utilizing the most model parameters (ViT -B with gpt -2-medium) with the most information (448 

input size, multi -view). In other words, 94.00% of the generated plant architecture token patterns 

were found in the ground truth plant architecture token corpus, whereas the remaining 6.0% 

existed in generated sequences only. The size of the model and the amount of information did 

not always correlate with BLEU -4 scores. For example, when a 224 -sized multi -view image was 

input into the ViT -B and gpt -2 combination, the score was lower than in other less favorable 

situations. 

Similarly, in the ROUGE -L score, the highest score of 0.5182 was observed in the model with 

the highest BLEU -4 score. However, it was also evident that the ROUGE -L score consistently 

increased when larger image sizes were used, when multi -view data was pro vided, when a larger 

vision encoder was used, and when a larger text decoder was employed. However, there was no 

substantial difference in performance across different models. If further training is conducted, the 

score gap would increase; however, the eva luation results suggested that the prediction 

performance of various models with the current dataset did not exhibit a noticeable difference in 

generation quality based on these differences. 

Table 3 Model evaluation metrics for different configurations. The highest BLEU -4 and 

ROUGE -L scores are shown in bold .Text Decoder 

gpt -2 gpt -2-medium 

View Input 

Size 

Vision 

Encoder 

BLEU -4

(%) 

ROUGE -L

(0 - 1) 

BLEU -4

(%) 

ROUGE -L

(0 - 1) 

Top -

view 

only 

224 2 ViT -S 92.35 0.4998 90.67 0.5056 

ViT -B 87.07 0.5023 87.85 0.5062 

448 2 ViT -S 84.97 0.4996 85.34 0.5070 

ViT -B 90.73 0.5030 90.79 0.5082 

Multi -

view 224 2 ViT -S 89.52 0.5093 91.10 0.5154 

ViT -B 84.88 0.5112 87.96 0.5150 

448 2 ViT -S 85.39 0.5090 84.27 0.5175 

ViT -B 89.08 0.5126 94.00 0.5182 

Fig. 6 shows rendered images from a generated plant architecture sequence from the best -

performing model (multi -view, 448, ViT -B, and gpt -2-medium), after converting the generated 

plant architecture token sequence from the input image back into XML and ren dering it. Figure 6. Examples of rendered images of plant architecture tokens generated from the 

best -performing model showing the highest BLEU -4 and ROUGE -L scores. Generated plant architecture token sequence evaluations 

To examine how precisely the model generates the plant architecture parameters, the pitch, yaw, 

and roll angles of the primary branch were compared between the generated plant architecture 

token sequence and the ground -truth. Due to the conversion from par ameter to token IDs, which 

converts float values into discrete integers, the parameter values exist in clusters. For example, in 

Fig. 7 (a), the base rotation pitch sampled from a [0, 10] uniform distribution is quantized to 

discrete float values ranging f rom 0 to 1.0 and 2.5 -degree angle steps, resulting in a grid -like 

scatter plot. The discrete patterns introduced by tokenization in yaw and roll angle of the primary 

branch, which range from 0 to 360 degrees, were less pronounced (Fig. 7 (b) and (c)). The range 

of pitch angle of the primary branch was narrow ([0, 10]) in the synthetic dataset and showed a 

subtle effect on the image, making its prediction challenging. The yaw and roll angles of the 

primary branch were closely clustered to the y=x line; howev er, there are clusters observed in 

y=x -180 and y=x+180, suggesting the model has difficulty with 180 -degree rotations around the 

element’s roll axis. Fig. 7 (d) compares the plant age from the generated plant architecture token 

with the plant age from the ground -truth. The plant age prediction showed an R 2 value of 1.00, 

with a root mean squared error (RMSE) of 0.79 days. From this, it can be assumed that 

predicting the plant age is a relatively easier task than predicting the plant’s rotation .Figure 7. Comparison of base rotation angles (pitch, yaw, and roll) of the first unifoliate 

shoot and plant age from the generated token sequence. The tokens for base rotation and 

plant age can be matched with the corresponding ground -truth plant architecture token 

sequence and converted to decimal values for comparison. 

As mentioned previously, the number of plant organs can be an important trait for plant 

phenotyping. Therefore, the numbers of plant organs from the generated plant architecture model 

and the ground truth were compared by counting plant organ tokens. The number of shoots 

refers to the number of shoot tokens in the plant architecture token sequence, which is a signal 

for creating a new branch. The number of phytomers was counted by grouping tokens that appear 

in the order of internode, petiole, and leaf into a single phytomer. 

Comparing the total number of plant organs revealed a high correlation between the generated 

and the ground truth plant architecture, similar to the correlation observed with plant age. Fig. 

8(a) shows the scatter plot of the number of shoots, with an R² v alue of 0.83 and an RMSE of 1.16. However, when compared to the 1:1 line, it was observed that the number of shoots 

predicted by the model was 20.7% less than the ground truth. Even if the generated plant 

architectures have fewer shoot tokens, as shown in Fig. 8(b), the model remains accurate in terms 

of the total number of phytomers in the plant architecture model. 

Figure 8. Comparison of the (a) number of branches and (b) phytomers from the generated 

token sequence. Ground truth refers to the true counts in the dataset, and generated 

refers to the result obtained from the generated token sequence. Green lines represent the 

fi tted linear regression between the ground truth and the generated data, while red dotted 

lines represent the y=x fit. Based on the slopes of the linear fit, the slope differences are 

displayed as Diff, showing -20.7% for (a) number of branched and -6.4% fo r (b) number 

of phytomers. 

The distributions of plant organ parameter tokens from generated plant architecture tokens and 

ground truth are illustrated in Fig. 9. As shown in Fig. 7, the model could estimate primary 

branch rotation and plant age parameters; these estimated parameters showed good agreement 

with the ground truth distributions, with a normalized Wasserstein distance of less than 0.05. 

Parameters that determine the size of each plant organ, such as internode length & radius, petiole 

length & radius, and leaf scale distributions, were also found to follow the ground truth 

distribution closely. However, some of the parameters showed normalized Wasserstein distance 

higher than 0.05, such as internode phyllotactic angle (0.059) and leaf pitch (0.065). Figure 9. Parameter distribution comparison from the test dataset (n=4,000) between the 

generated and ground truth. Uni. shoot refers to a branch where unifoliate leaves are 

connected, and Tri. shoot refers to a branch where trifoliate leaves are connected. The 

asterisk (*) sign is labeled if the normalized Wasserstein distance (WD) is less than 5% 

(0.05). The leaf angle distribution of the plant architecture was calculated through geometric 

calculations based on leaf normals generated in the plant architecture simulation. A comparison 

was then made between the ground truth data and the model -generated leaf angle distributions. 

Fig. 10 shows the results of calculating the leaf Inclination angle using the plant architecture 

token sequence predicted from the image. Overall, the agreement ranged from a minimum of 

0.018 to a maximum of 0.078 based on the normaliz ed Wasserstein Distance. In the case of Fig. 

10 (a) for day 5, the generated plant architecture predicted leaf angles in the 18° to 36° range and 

above 45° to 63° with a higher frequency than the ground truth, while predicting a lower 

frequency in the 36° to 45° and 63° to 90° ranges. For day 10 in Fig. 10(b), it predicted a higher 

frequency in the 18° to 36° range and similar or lower frequencies in the other ranges. In the 

cases of Fig. 10 (c) - (e), although some ranges were predicted with varying accura cy, the overall 

trend shows a normalized Wasserstein distance within 0.1, or a 10% difference. Figure 10. Selected sample images from a test plant across the plant age dates (a -e). Left 

column: ground truth images from the dataset. Middle column: Re -rendered image from 

generated plant architecture. Right column: Comparison of leaf angle distribution 

between gr ound truth and generated, along with Wasserstein distance. Plant height, leaf count, and leaf area estimation and comparison with 

# naive baseline 

This section calculates plant height, leaf count, and total leaf area using Helios plant simulation 

for 4,000 pairs of ground -truth and generated plant architecture token sequences, and compares 

them against a regression -based baseline method. Fig. 11 illu strates the results of a baseline 

model utilizing vision transformer features with a fully connected layer to estimate plant height, 

leaf count, and leaf area. As shown in Fig. 11, the ViT -B + FC model, which directly predicts 

plant traits using features f rom ViT -B, yields mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) values of 

3.5%, 26.0%, and 11.8% for plant height, leaf count, and leaf area, respectively. Our model, 

which is shown as ViT -B + LM decoder , showed a higher MAPE value of 4.9% for estimating 

the plant height compared to the baseline method. However, leaf count and leaf area showed 

lower MAPE values than the baseline method, showing 4.1% for leaf count and 3.2% for leaf 

area. 

Figure 11. Comparison of plant scale bulk parameters (a) plant height, (b) leaf count, and 

(c) leaf area, derived from plant architecture generation and direct prediction using 

image features. Discussion 

The main hypothesis of this paper was whether the details of plant architecture and topology can 

be learned from images using a large language model. We tested this hypothesis by using 

synthetic image data alongside detailed plant architecture information and training a vision -based 

large language model algorithm. Research predicting plant structure through images has been 

ongoing; however, this is the first study to utilize a vision language model to predict tokens that 

define plant structure. This study d emonstrated that a vision language model can generate plant 

architecture, from organ -level to plant -level, from an image by estimating the tokens that build 

plant architecture. As shown in Fig. 6, even if the generated plant architecture overall appeared 

to reflect the general shape and complexity of the ground truth, it could not perfectly replicate 

the input image itself. This is because the model is only trained to predict the n th token from a 

sequence of tokens up to n -1 during the model training proces s. In other words, the model cannot 

access the rendered images generated from plant architecture tokens, and therefore, it has not 

been optimized to maximize the similarity of these images. Also, the generated plant architecture 

tends to have more branches than the ground truth. 

Even though there is still room for improvement in the generated plant architecture, the results 

overall appeared to successfully estimate the plant traits from the input image. Fig. 7, 8, 9 

showed that the plant architectural parameters can be estimated f rom the generated plant 

architecture. Still, there were some limitations in estimating the plant organ parameters. First of 

all, converting floating -point value parameters to integer token IDs introduced quantization error, 

transforming the parameter distr ibutions into discrete distributions and changing the shape of the 

distribution. For example, the unifoliate shoot’s pitch angle and internode phyllotactic angle 

were sampled from uniform distributions (Table 1), but the tokenized distributions (Fig. 9(a, i)) 

were not uniformly distributed. Secondly, a phenomenon called mean collapse occurred, where 

the data tends to cluster around the most frequently occurring values in the ground truth data, 

resulting in predictions collapsing to a few representative toke ns. This is noticeable in the leaf 

parameters, such as in the leaf pitch values from Fig. 9 (s), where up to 400 leaves can appear in 

a single plant architecture model. Still, the overall distributions of estimated plant organ parameters followed the parameter distributions of the ground truth, showing a maximum value 

of normalized WD as 0.065. 

By analyzing the generated plant architecture at the plant scale, indirect traits such as leaf angle 

distribution can be derived, as shown in Fig. 10, that can only be calculated from the 3D 

simulation and were not used for training explicitly. Although th e leaf pitch angle distributions 

showed limited representation, the final calculated leaf angle distribution can be predicted with 

relatively high accuracy, showing normalized WD values of 0.018 to 0.078 (Fig. 10). This 

indicates that while the model canno t perfectly predict the angle of every individual leaf, it can 

accurately capture the overall trend of leaf angle distribution in the image without being 

explicitly trained to do so. 

In addition to plant organ parameters, plant -scale bulk parameters, including plant height, leaf 

count, and leaf area, were compared between the predicted and the ground truth. Even if the 

baseline model only utilized a pretrained feature extractor with on e layer of a fully connected 

layer, it could successfully predict those bulk parameters with high R 2 values, by explicitly 

learning those traits from image features. However, the baseline approach is limited to predicting 

individual traits and cannot captu re the overall complex architecture of the plant, which is 

needed for FSPM simulation inputs. Compared to this, the plant architecture -based model 

implicitly learned plant height, leaf count, and leaf area through the plant architecture token 

sequence, and it was able to predict these variables more accurately than models trained directly 

on them. Notably, leaf count (Fig. 11 (b)) and leaf area (Fig. 11 (c)) could be predicted with 

higher R 2 and lower RMSE than direct estimation. The better accuracy on leaf count and leaf 

area means that the model, trained using plant architecture information, can more accurately 

predict traits that are difficult to estimate due to occlusion. In other words, this indicates that our 

model has learned the complex internal architecture of the plant —such as leaf count and leaf 

area —that cannot be easily predicted from 2D images without understanding plant architecture, 

enabling it to estimate traits closely relate d to the plant's structure. Conclusions 

This research hypothesized that organ -level plant architecture can be generated from implicit 

information in plant images through a vision -language model. The results showed that a vision 

encoder -decoder model trained on a synthetic cowpea dataset could ge nerate organ -level plant 

architectural reconstructions from images. Also, the model was capable of estimating whole -

plant traits such as plant height, leaf count, and leaf area, approaching directly trained models' 

performance even if the language model ne ver saw those values during training. The main 

takeaway of this paper is that plant architecture can be processed and tokenized for training with 

a large language model. The benefit of generating a synthetic dataset was that it decreased the 

ground truth d ataset generation time relative to manual measurement in the field. Moreover, the 

synthetic dataset’s accurate and comprehensive plant architecture information allows us to verify 

the algorithm's validity with “exact” ground truth data. Future research wil l extend this study to 

real image domains. We will improve this result by collecting real plant architecture data from 

the field to compare with our model's predictions, and improve performance using few -shot 

learning with the collected data. Also, we will test the algorithm with various backgrounds, 

lighting conditions, and occlusions to overcome the complexity of the actual environment. 

The methodology used in this work has limitations that will be the target for improvement in 

future iterations. T he current model training is an open -loop process , which means the rendered 

image from the generated plant architecture cannot provide feedback to the model weights. 

Therefore, future research should provide feedback on the generated image through 

reinforcement learning by adding the Helios simulation program i n the training loop. We plan to 

incorporate reinforcement learning based on rendering image similarity into this pre -trained plant 

architecture token generation model, aiming to fine -tune the model so that the final rendered 

image is similar to the input i mage. Additionally, at present, only the plant organs of the shoot, 

internode, petiole, and leaf are considered, assuming the plants are in the vegetative growth 

stage; however, reproductive organs will be included in future studies. 

In conclusion, this paper marks an initial step showing that a vision -based large language model 

can shift the paradigm for plant architecture modeling in plant science. By demonstrating this possibility with a synthetic dataset, this paper provides a foundation for the next step of applying 

our model to a larger dataset or a real environment. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported, in whole or in part, by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation INV -

0028630. Under the grant conditions of the Foundation, a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 

Generic License has already been assigned to the Author Accepted Manuscript v ersion that 

might arise from this submission. 

# References 

Allen, M.T., Prusinkiewicz, P., DeJong, T.M., 2005. Using L -systems for modeling source –sink 

interactions, architecture and physiology of growing trees: the L -PEACH model. New 

Phytol. 166, 869 –880. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469 -8137.2005.01348.x 

Bailey, B.N., 2019. Helios: A Scalable 3D Plant and Environmental Biophysical Modeling 

Framework. Front. Plant Sci. 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01185 

Burgess, A.J., Retkute, R., Herman, T., Murchie, E.H., 2017. Exploring Relationships between 

Canopy Architecture, Light Distribution, and Photosynthesis in Contrasting Rice 

Genotypes Using 3D Canopy Reconstruction. Front. Plant Sci. 8. 

https://doi.org/10.3 389/fpls.2017.00734 

Digrado, A., Mitchell, N.G., Montes, C.M., Dirvanskyte, P., Ainsworth, E.A., 2020. Assessing 

diversity in canopy architecture, photosynthesis, and water -use efficiency in a cowpea 

magic population. Food Energy Secur. 9, e236. https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.2 36 

Duvick, D.N., Smith, J.S.C., Cooper, M., 2003. Long -Term Selection in a Commercial Hybrid 

Maize Breeding Program, in: Plant Breeding Reviews. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 109 –

151. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470650288.ch4 

Elli, E.F., Edwards, J., Yu, J., Trifunovic, S., Eudy, D.M., Kosola, K.R., Schnable, P.S., Lamkey, 

K.R., Archontoulis, S.V., 2023. Maize leaf angle genetic gain is slowing down in the last 

decades. Crop Sci. 63, 3520 –3533. https://doi.org/10.1002/csc2.2111 1

Ford, E.D., 2014. The dynamic relationship between plant architecture and competition. Front. 

Plant Sci. 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00275 

Hammer, G.L., Dong, Z., McLean, G., Doherty, A., Messina, C., Schussler, J., Zinselmeier, C., 

Paszkiewicz, S., Cooper, M., 2009. Can Changes in Canopy and/or Root System 

Architecture Explain Historical Maize Yield Trends in the U.S. Corn Belt? Crop Sci. 49 ,

299 –312. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2008.03.0152 Karwowski, R., Prusinkiewicz , P., 2004. The L -system -based plant -modeling environment L -

studio 4.0, in: In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Functional−Structural 

Plant Models. p. 403−405. 

Kashiwagi, T., Ishimaru, K., 2004. Identification and Functional Analysis of a Locus for 

Improvement of Lodging Resistance in Rice. Plant Physiol. 134, 676 –683. 

https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.103.029355 

Kurth, W., Ong, Y., 2017. A design pattern in XL for implementing multiscale models, 

demonstrated with a fruit tree simulator. Acta Hortic. 35 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2017.1160.6 

Li, J., Qi, X., Nabaei, S.H., Liu, M., Chen, D., Zhang, X., Yin, X., Li, Z., 2025. A Survey on 3D 

Reconstruction Techniques in Plant Phenotyping: From Classical Methods to Neural 

Radiance Fields (NeRF), 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), and Beyond. 

https://doi .org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.00737 

Lin, C. -Y., 2004. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries, in: Text 

Summarization Branches Out. Association for Computational Linguistics, Barcelona, 

Spain, pp. 74 –81. 

Lindenmayer, A., 1968a. Mathematical models for cellular interactions in development I. 

Filaments with one -sided inputs. J. Theor. Biol. 18, 280 –299. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0022 -5193(68)90079 -9

Lindenmayer, A., 1968b. Mathematical models for cellular interactions in development II. 

Simple and branching filaments with two -sided inputs. J. Theor. Biol. 18, 300 –315. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0022 -5193(68)90080 -5

Olorunwa, O.J., Adhikari, B., Shi, A., Barickman, T.C., 2022. Screening of cowpea ( Vigna 

unguiculata (L.) Walp.) genotypes for waterlogging tolerance using morpho -

physiological traits at early growth stage. Plant Sci. 315, 111136. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111136 

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W. -J., 2001. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation 

of machine translation, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for 

Computational Linguistics - ACL ’02. Presented at the the 40th Annual Meeti ng, 

Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, p. 311. 

https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135 

Pele, F.D., Yeboah, A., Buari, M.S., Kofi, E.J., 2016. Morpho -physiological parameters used in 

selecting drought tolerant cowpea varieties using drought index. 

Schiller, C., Schmidtlein, S., Boonman, C., Moreno -Martínez, A., Kattenborn, T., 2021. 

Deep learning and citizen science enable automated plant trait predictions from 

photographs. Sci Rep 11, 16395. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021 -95616 -0

Schnepf, A., Leitner, D., Landl, M., Lobet, G., Mai, T.H., Morandage, S., Sheng, C., Zörner, M., 

Vanderborght, J., Vereecken, H., 2018. CRootBox: a structural –functional modelling framework for root systems. Ann. Bot. 121, 1033 –1053. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcx221 

Singh, B., Kumar, S., Elangovan, A., Vasht, D., Arya, S., Duc, N.T., Swami, P., Pawar, G.S., 

Raju, D., Krishna, H., Sathee, L., Dalal, M., Sahoo, R.N., Chinnusamy, V., 2023. 

Phenomics based prediction of plant biomass and leaf area in wheat using machine 

learning approaches. Front Plant Sci 14, 1214801. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2023.1214801 

Sievänen, R., Godin, C., DeJong, T.M., Nikinmaa, E., 2014. Functional –structural plant models: 

a growing paradigm for plant studies. Ann. Bot. 114, 599 –603. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcu175 

Soualiou, S., Wang, Z., Sun, W., de Reffye, P., Collins, B., Louarn, G., Song, Y., 2021. 

Functional –Structural Plant Models Mission in Advancing Crop Science: Opportunities 

and Prospects. Front. Plant Sci. 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.747142 

Teichmann, T., Muhr, M., 2015. Shaping plant architecture. Front. Plant Sci. 6. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00233 

Wang, Z., Lorraine, J., Wang, Y., Su, H., Zhu, J., Fidler, S., Zeng, X., 2024. LLaMA -Mesh: 

Unifying 3D Mesh Generation with Language Models. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.09595 

Wu, D. -H., Chen, C. -T., Yang, M. -D., Wu, Y. -C., Lin, C. -Y., Lai, M. -H., Yang, C. -Y., 2022. 

Controlling the lodging risk of rice based on a plant height dynamic model. Bot. Stud. 63, 

25. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40529 -022 -00356 -7

Yu, Y., Cheng, Q., Wang, F., Zhu, Y., Shang, X., Jones, A., He, H., Song, Y., 2023. Crop/Plant 

Modeling Supports Plant Breeding: I. Optimization of Environmental Factors in 

Accelerating Crop Growth and Development for Speed Breeding. Plant Phenomics 5, 

009 9. https://doi.org/10.34133/plantphenomics.0099 

Yun, K., Kim, S. -H., 2023. Cropbox: a declarative crop modelling framework. Silico Plants 5, 

diac021. https://doi.org/10.1093/insilicoplants/diac021 

Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Neng, F., Xiong, S., Wei, Y., Cao, R., Wei, Q., Ma, X., Wang, X., 2022. 

Canopy light distribution effects on light use efficiency in wheat and its mechanism. 

Front. Ecol. Evol. 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2022.1023117 

Zhao, D. -D., Jang, Y. -H., Kim, E. -G., Park, J. -R., Jan, R., Lubna, Asaf, S., Asif, S., Farooq, M., 

Chung, H., Kang, D. -J., Kim, K. -M., 2023. Identification of a Major Locus for Lodging 

Resistance to Typhoons Using QTL Analysis in Rice. Plants 12, 449. 

http s://doi.org/10.3390/plants12030449 Zheng, C., Abd -Elrahman, A., Whitaker, V.M., 

Dalid, C., 2022. Deep Learning for Strawberry Canopy Delineation and Biomass 

Prediction from High -Resolution Images. Plant Phenomics 2022. 

https://doi.org/10.34133/2022/9850486