Title: Geometric Reciprocity: Unlocking Self-Supervision for Stereoscopic Video Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.05354v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:36:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Geometric Reciprocity: Unlocking Self-Supervision for Stereoscopic Video Generation 

Jingyi Lu 1 Kai Han 1

## Abstract 

Monocular-to-stereo conversion synthesizes stereoscopic content from 2D videos for immersive 3D experiences. In modern Depth-Image-Based Rendering (DIBR) approaches, stereo inpainting of disocclusions is the critical bottleneck. Training-based methods achieve superior quality but rely on scarce stereo pairs or synthetic data with domain gaps. We address this through the first self-supervised framework learning from monocular videos via cycle consistency. Our key contribution is the Geometric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT) :under the nearest-neighbor DIBR formulation, the disocclusion mask when synthesizing atarget view equals the mask of pixels lost when warping back from target to source, enabling analytical computation of test-time disocclusion masks directly from monocular images. This yields train-test consistency for the stated warping formulation, supporting self-supervised learning from unlimited monocular videos and substantial improvements over training-free and supervised state-of-the-art methods. Project page: 

https://visual-ai.github.io/grt/ 

## 1. Introduction 

The demand for immersive 3D experiences on VR/AR de-vices, 3D cinema, and stereoscopic displays has made stereo-scopic video generation a fundamental problem. The task is to convert monocular videos to stereoscopic format by syn-thesizing one view from the other (conventionally right-eye from left-eye, or vice versa). Modern approaches predominantly adopt the Depth-Image-Based Rendering (DIBR) framework (Wang et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Huang et al., 

> 1

Visual AI Lab, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Kai Han <kaihanx@hku.hk >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

2025; Shvetsova et al., 2026), which decomposes the prob-lem into three sequential stages: estimating depth from the input frame, warping the image to synthesize an initial tar-get view, and inpainting the resulting disocclusions. These disocclusions are regions newly visible in the target view that were occluded in the source, creating geometrically structured missing patterns that general-purpose inpainting methods cannot handle (see Section A7). This domain gap has made the stereo inpainting stage the critical bottleneck. Due to the scarcity of training data, recent training-free methods (Wang et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024) manipulate pretrained diffusion models for zero-shot stereo inpainting, but lack stereo-specific geometric priors and produce infe-rior results. Training-based approaches (Zhao et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025; Shvetsova et al., 2026) learn these priors yet face a fundamental challenge in training data quality and availability. Existing methods either rely on scarce and often proprietary real stereo pairs with error-prone stereo matching for disocclusion identification (Zhao et al., 2024; Shvetsova et al., 2026), or resort to synthetic data that suf-fers from inevitable domain gaps (Huang et al., 2025) (see Section A8 for more details). To address the data bottleneck, we propose the first self-supervised framework that learns stereo inpainting from monocular videos alone, eliminating the need for stereo pairs or synthetic data. Our approach exploits the inherent bidirectional symmetry of stereo view relationships, en-abling right-left-right cycle consistency where generating the left view from right through DIBR and then reconstruct-ing the right from the synthesized left should recover the original input. While cycle consistency provides self-supervision in prin-ciple, naive implementation requires multiple sequen-tial model inferences and backpropagation through non-differentiable warping operations, making video-scale train-ing computationally prohibitive. We resolve this through a geometric insight: the stereo warping process itself en-codes all information needed to compute cycle consistency losses without executing the cycle. Through rigorous geo-metric analysis, we discover that in the right-left-right cycle, the intermediate steps of inpainting the left view, estimat-ing its depth, and performing pixel warping operations are 1  

> arXiv:2607.05354v1 [cs.CV] 6 Jul 2026 Geometric Reciprocity
> Table 1. Comparison of training data construction approaches. Our Geometric Reciprocity Theorem enables constructing scalable, high-quality training data with train-inference consistent masks from arbitrary real-world monocular videos.

Preferable Properties Data Real-World Mask Train-Inference Training Scalability Data Quality Consistency Efficiency Real Stereo Pairs ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓

Synthetic Data ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓

Cycle Consistency (Ours) ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✗

Geometric Reciprocity (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

redundant under the nearest-neighbor DIBR formulation. We formalize this as the Geometric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT) : for any right (target) view to be synthesized from a left (source) view, the disocclusion mask required equals the mask of pixels that would be lost when warping back from target to source. This theorem reveals that the cycle consistency supervision signal can be computed analytically from the target view alone using only its depth estimate, with no synthesis, no intermediate views, and no cycling required. GRT fundamentally transforms training data construction. By treating any monocular image as a target view, we di-rectly compute its inference-time disocclusion mask via GRT, yielding the mask induced by the same DIBR geome-try used at test time. The image itself then serves as ground truth for these disocclusions, enabling self-supervised train-ing from unlimited monocular videos with train-inference consistency that substantially outperforms both training-free methods and supervised state-of-the-art. We summarize the above comparisons in Table 1. Our contributions are: (1) the first self-supervised stereo inpainting framework learning from monocular videos with-out requiring stereo pairs or synthetic data, (2) the Geo-metric Reciprocity Theorem enabling analytical cycle con-sistency computation without executing the cycle, (3) the first comprehensive datasets (ImageNet-GRT, Kinetics-GRT, and DAVIS-GRT) with geometrically consistent disocclu-sion masks for training and evaluation, and (4) state-of-the-art performance surpassing both training-free and super-vised methods. Code, precomputed masks, and trained weights will be released at https://github.com/ Visual-AI/GRT .

## 2. Related work 

2.1. Monocular-to-Stereo Video Conversion 

Monocular-to-stereo video conversion synthesizes a right-eye view from standard 2D video (assumed as left-eye in-put) for immersive 3D experiences on stereoscopic displays, 3D cinemas, and VR/AR devices. Early work (Xie et al., 2016) attempted direct regression using end-to-end CNNs but was limited by lack of robust depth priors. Modern approaches predominantly adopt Depth-Image-Based Ren-dering (DIBR) , which first estimates per-frame depth maps with pretrained models like Depth Anything (Yang et al., 2024), then warps the left view to synthesize an initial right view. This warping uncovers disocclusions—areas occluded in the left view—framing monocular-to-stereo conversion as stereo inpainting : filling newly visible regions. Recent solutions tackle this challenge in various ways. 

Training-free methods leverage pretrained models with-out fine-tuning. StereoDiffusion (Wang et al., 2024) per-forms zero-shot inpainting by manipulating latents in pre-trained image diffusion models. StereoCrafter-Zero (Shi et al., 2024) uses noisy restart and iterative refinement on video diffusion models. SVG (Dai et al., 2024) contributes a Frame Matrix architecture for video consistency while remaining training-free. 

Training-based methods demonstrate superior quality and consistency by learning stereo-specific priors from datasets. StereoCrafter (Zhao et al., 2024) fine-tunes Stable Video Diffusion using auto-regressive strategies for temporal co-herence. Restereo (Huang et al., 2025) jointly addresses stereo generation and video restoration via training on syn-thetically degraded data. M2SVid (Shvetsova et al., 2026) improves efficiency through single-step feed-forward predic-tion conditioned on both original left and warped right views. However, without ready-to-use stereo inpainting datasets, these methods construct training data through preprocess-ing pipelines. Methods using real stereo pairs face stereo matching errors and copyright restrictions, while those us-ing synthetic data face domain gaps between rendered and real videos, limiting generalization. 

2.2. Monocular Depth Estimation 

Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) infers dense depth maps from single images. Early methods trained on single-domain datasets like KITTI (Geiger et al., 2012) or NYU-D (Silberman et al., 2012) performed well in specific sce-narios but lacked generalization. Recent foundation mod-els achieve zero-shot capabilities through multi-dataset ag-gregation (MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2020)) and massive unla-beled datasets (Depth Anything (Yang et al., 2024), Depth-Pro (Bochkovskii et al., 2025)). Advances include genera-2Geometric Reciprocity 

tive models like Marigold (Ke et al., 2024), Vision Trans-former architectures (Ranftl et al., 2021), and robustness improvements under adverse conditions (Kong et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2025). For DIBR-based monocular-to-stereo conversion, predicted depth maps gov-ern warping by defining per-pixel horizontal displacement, with closer objects shifted more than distant ones to create stereoscopic effects. 

2.3. Cycle Consistency 

Cycle consistency enables unsupervised learning by en-forcing bidirectional consistency ( A → B → A). Cy-cleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) demonstrated this for unpaired image-to-image translation. Applications span domain adap-tation (Hoffman et al., 2018; Singh, 2021), temporal learn-ing (Dwibedi et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021), 3D dense cor-respondence (Zhou et al., 2016), and super-resolution (Yuan et al., 2018). TrajectoryCrafter (Yu et al., 2025a) extends cycle consistency to multi-view synthesis through explicit forward-backward reprojection, requiring two full rendering passes. In contrast, our GRT reveals the analytical redun-dancy in this cycle and enables direct disocclusion mask derivation from target-view geometry alone. 

## 3. Method 

We present a self-supervised approach for training stereo in-painting networks using monocular videos (images). Build-ing on the DIBR framework (Section 3.1), we identify data scarcity and domain gaps as key bottlenecks (Sec-tion 3.2). We introduce cycle consistency (Section 3.3) as a self-supervision mechanism and prove the Geomet-ric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT) (Section 3.4), which elimi-nates the computational overhead of cycle consistency while preserving equivalent geometric constraints, enabling self-supervised learning from monocular videos (images) with-out requiring paired stereo data (Section 3.5). 

3.1. Preliminaries 

Stereoscopic video generation synthesizes stereo pairs from monocular input for immersive 3D visualization. Given a monocular frame as the left-eye view IL, the task is to generate the corresponding right-eye view IR. While the reverse direction is equally valid, we adopt the left-to-right formulation for clarity. Modern approaches employ the Depth-Image-Based Rendering (DIBR) framework, which reduces stereoscopic generation to a stereo inpainting prob-lem. First, a depth estimation model D predicts disparity, which is inversely proportional to depth: 

dL = D(IL), dL = bf ZL

, (1) where dL(x, y ) denotes the disparity at pixel (x, y ),

ZL(x, y ) is the corresponding depth, b is the baseline, and 

f is the focal length. We adopt the convention that dispar-ity values are positive, with larger values indicating closer objects. Second, warping projects the input to the target viewpoint. Specifically, WL→R establishes pixel correspon-dences between views. For each pixel (x, y ) in the left view, its corresponding position (x′, y ′) in the right view is computed as: 

x′ = x − dL(x, y ), y′ = y, (2) where the horizontal coordinate is shifted by the dispar-ity value, while the vertical coordinate remains unchanged due to rectified stereo geometry. During warping, multiple source pixels may map to the same target location (collision), or some target pixels may receive no mapping (disocclu-sion). The warping operation outputs the warped image ˜IR

and the disocclusion mask M L→R 

> dis

:

˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

= WL→R(IL, d L), (3) where M L→R 

> dis

(x, y ) = 1 indicates pixels that are disoc-cluded in ˜IR and require inpainting. Third, a stereo inpaint-ing network fills these holes: 

ˆIR = G( ˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

), (4) where G represents the stereo inpainting network. 

3.2. Motivation 

The primary bottleneck in DIBR-based stereoscopic genera-tion is training the stereo inpainting network G, stemming from the unique characteristics of stereoscopic disocclusion patterns and the scarcity of suitable training data. 

Domain gap in disocclusion patterns. Stereoscopic disoc-clusion masks M L→R 

> dis

exhibit geometrically structured pat-terns fundamentally different from typical inpainting masks (random strokes, rectangular regions, or object instances). This domain gap causes general inpainting methods and training-free methods (Wang et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024) to produce suboptimal results, lacking stereo-specific geomet-ric priors for plausible disocclusion filling. Data scarcity for supervised training. Supervised approaches (Zhao et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025) require training pairs 

(IR, M L→R 

> dis

), where the stereo inpainting network takes masked right view IR ⊙(1 −M L→R 

> dis

) and disocclusion mask 

M L→R 

> dis

as input, using IR for supervision. However, no ready-to-use datasets exist. To construct such data from real stereo pairs, StereoCrafter (Zhao et al., 2024) collects real stereo video pairs and generates training data by aligning left to right views to identify disocclusion regions M L→R 

> dis

. How-ever, this alignment introduces stereo matching errors that severely degrade data quality. Moreover, high-quality stereo 3Geometric Reciprocity Cycle Consistency           

> Figure 1. Cycle consistency framework. Given right view IR, the complete cycle synthesizes left view through depth estimation (D), forward warping ( WR→L), and inpainting ( G), then reconstructs the right view via depth estimation on the synthesized left view, backward warping ( WL→R), and inpainting. The reconstruction loss Lcycle =∥ˆIrecon
> R−IR∥provides self-supervision.

videos predominantly come from copyrighted 3D films with restricted access, further limiting availability. Synthetic data approaches, such as Restereo (Huang et al., 2025) using Kubric (Greff et al., 2022), avoid stereo matching errors but suffer significant domain gaps between rendered and real-world videos, limiting real-world generalization. To overcome these limitations, we propose the first self-supervised approach leveraging abundant monocular videos (images) for training stereo inpainting networks. Our method demonstrates that, based on cycle consistency, dis-occlusion masks M L→R 

> dis

can be directly derived from right views IR to construct training data, eliminating the need for stereo pairs or synthetic data. 

3.3. Cycle Consistency 

We introduce right-left-right cycle consistency as a self-supervision mechanism for stereoscopic generation. As illustrated in Figure 1, the principle is geometric and bidi-rectional: synthesizing the left view from the right, then reconstructing the right from this synthesized left, should recover the original input. Given a frame IR, we first synthe-size a pseudo left-eye view through the DIBR framework: 

dR = D(IR), (5) 

˜IL, M R→L 

> dis

= WR→L(IR, d R), (6) 

ˆIL = G( ˜IL, M R→L 

> dis

). (7) The right view is then reconstructed from ˆIL:

ˆdL = D( ˆIL), (8) 

˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

= WL→R( ˆIL, ˆdL), (9) 

ˆIrecon  

> R

= G( ˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

). (10) The cycle consistency loss enforces that reconstruction matches input: 

Lcycle = ∥ ˆIrecon  

> R

− IR∥. (11) While cycle consistency enables self-supervised training without paired stereo data, naive implementation is compu-tationally prohibitive. End-to-end differentiability requires backpropagating through warping operations W (·, ·) that de-pend on estimated disparity D(·), yet warping involves dis-crete pixel coordinate mapping and scattered writes to irregu-lar locations, operations fundamentally non-differentiable in nature. Differentiable rendering approximations introduce substantial overhead and complexity. More critically, the cycle demands four sequential model inferences per train-ing step: disparity estimation from IR, left view inpainting, disparity re-estimation from ˆIL, and final right view inpaint-ing. This doubles memory requirements and training costs while accumulating errors through multiple non-linear trans-formations, making video-scale training computationally infeasible. 

3.4. Geometric Reciprocity Theorem 

We resolve all aforementioned challenges through a key ge-ometric insight: the stereo warping process itself inherently encodes all information needed to enforce cycle consistency. Building on this insight, we mathematically prove that the entire gradient-intensive left view synthesis steps, including inpainting the left view, estimating its depth, and performing pixel warping operations, do not affect the cycle consistency loss Lcycle and can therefore be eliminated entirely. We formalize this result as follows: 

Geometric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT). Under the nearest-neighbor DIBR formulation, for any right (target) view IR synthesized from a left (source) view, the disocclu-sion mask required for synthesis is mathematically equiva-lent to the mask of pixels that would be lost when warping from right (target) to left (source): 

M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

, (12) where M R→L 

> lost

identifies pixels in IR that would be lost due to boundary violations or depth occlusions during right-to-left warping with estimated disparity dR = D(IR). By 

4Geometric Reciprocity Eliminating left view inpainting. 

Eliminating left view disparity estimation. 

Eliminating warping operations. 

## From Cycle Consistency to Geometric Reciprocity Theorem 

Figure 2. Progressive simplification of cycle consistency to Geometric Reciprocity. (i) Inpainted regions in ˆIL do not affect ˆIrecon  

> R

,allowing us to skip left view inpainting (marked with ×) and directly use ˜IL. (ii) Right-to-left warping transfers disparity from dR to 

˜IL, allowing us to skip left view disparity estimation and directly reuse ˜dL. (iii) Transferred disparity ensures perfect round-trips for all validly warped pixels, enabling analytical computation of M L→R 

> dis

as pixels lost during right-to-left warping and eliminating all warping operations (marked with ×). The final result reveals that M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

can be computed directly from (IR, d R) alone. 

treating any monocular image as a right (target) view, GRT enables us to directly compute the inference-time disocclu-sion mask that would emerge when synthesizing it from a left (source) view, using only depth estimation from IR. The im-age itself then serves as ground truth for these disocclusions, enabling self-supervised training from monocular videos (images) while bypassing the entire synthesis pipeline. 3.4.1. P ROOF OF GRT We prove the GRT by progressively simplifying the cycle consistency framework through three geometric observa-tions visualized in Figure 2. Remarkably, we demonstrate that each computational step in the naive cycle can be elimi-nated without affecting the final result, revealing an elegant mathematical structure underlying stereoscopic generation. Note that this proof assumes nearest-neighbor warping; we extend to soft interpolation warping in Section A9. 

Eliminating left view inpainting. We first observe that the inpainted left view content, ˆIL = G( ˜IL, M R→L 

> dis

), is geo-metrically irrelevant to the cycle consistency loss. Consider pixels where M R→L 

> dis

= 1 : these regions were disoccluded during right-to-left warping and thus have no physical coun-terpart in the original IR. When warping back from left to right, these inpainted pixels cannot produce valid mappings since they represent content absent from the actual scene geometry. Consequently, the disocclusion mask M L→R

> dis

computed from the incomplete warped view ˜IL is identical to that computed from the fully inpainted ˆIL. This geometric property allows us to bypass the entire left view inpainting step: 

˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

= WL→R( ˜IL, D( ˜IL)) . (13) 

Eliminating left view disparity estimation. Having estab-lished that we can work directly with ˜IL in the previous step, we recognize that disparity estimation from the left view is redundant. During forward warping, each pixel (xR, y R) in 

IR projects to position (xL, y L) where: 

xL = xR + dR(xR, y R), yL = yR. (14) Treating disparity as a single-channel image, this projection simultaneously transfers both color and disparity to non-5Geometric Reciprocity 

disoccluded pixels: 

˜IL(xL, y L) = IR(xR, y R),

˜dL(xL, y L) = dR(xR, y R), (15) where (xL, y L) receives projection from (xR, y R). Note that ˜dL contains valid disparity values only at non-disoccluded pixels transferred from IR, while disoccluded regions (where M R→L 

> dis

= 1 ) remain undefined. The crucial observation is that the previous step eliminated the need for complete left view information. We only need disparity val-ues for non-disoccluded pixels in ˜IL, precisely those already transferred from IR. Disoccluded regions do not participate in backward warping and thus do not require disparity esti-mation. Therefore, we directly use the transferred disparity 

˜dL instead of re-estimating via D( ˜IL), eliminating another computational bottleneck: 

˜IR, M L→R 

> dis

= WL→R( ˜IL, ˜dL). (16) 

Eliminating warping operations. Our final observation is that even the warping operations themselves can be elim-inated. After removing both left view inpainting and dis-parity estimation, the cycle reduces to forward-backward warping: estimate disparity dR from IR, forward warp to obtain ˜IL and ˜dL, then backward warp to compute ˜IR and 

M L→R 

> dis

. We observe that pixels completing the round-trip warping return to their exact original positions: 

x′ 

> R

= xL − ˜dL(xL, y L)= [ xR + dR(xR, y R)] − [dR(xR, y R)] = xR.

(17) This reveals the fundamental structure: pixels completing the forward-backward cycle remain unchanged, while those failing to complete it form the disocclusion mask. From a self-supervised learning perspective, this structure naturally provides supervision. Pixels completing the cycle corre-spond to regions where ground truth exists in IR, while 

M L→R 

> dis

identifies regions requiring inpainting. Rather than explicitly performing warping operations to identify these regions, we determine which pixels from IR fail to complete the round-trip. A pixel (xR, y R) is lost under two mutually exclusive conditions: 

(a) Boundary violation: The pixel projects outside the image domain during forward warping: 

M R→L 

> oob

(xR, y R) = I[xR + dR(xR, y R) /∈ [0 , W )] , (18) where W is image width and I[·] is the indicator function. 

(b) Depth occlusion: Multiple pixels from IR map to the same location (xL, y L) during forward warping. Only the closest pixel is retained using a depth buffer: 

B[xL, y L] = max  

> (xR,y R)→(xL,y L)

dR(xR, y R), (19) where (xR, y R) → (xL, y L) denotes all pixels from IR

projecting to (xL, y L) with yR = yL. A pixel is occluded if its disparity is less than this maximum: 

M R→L 

> occl

(xR, y R) = I[dR(xR, y R) < B [xL, y L]] , (20) where (xL, y L) is the projected location from (xR, y R). The complete lost pixel mask combines both cases: 

M R→L 

> lost

= M R→L 

> oob

∨ M R→L 

> occl

. (21) Both conditions depend only on (IR, d R) and require no warping operations, only analytical computation. This re-markable result establishes the GRT: by eliminating all three computational steps (left view inpainting, left view disparity estimation, and warping operations), we arrive at the elegant equivalence M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

. Note that if we start from the left-right-left cycle instead, we can derive the symmetric result M R→L 

> dis

= M L→R 

> lost

.3.4.2. E QUIVALENCE TO FULL SUPERVISION 

Unlike most self-supervised methods (Zhu et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021) that provide weak, indirect supervision for downstream tasks, GRT fundamentally differs by pro-ducing the same mask supervision as paired stereo data under the stated DIBR formulation. By treating any monoc-ular image as a target view IR, GRT directly computes 

M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

from disparity estimation alone. This is the same mask that emerges when a source view syn-thesizes IR via DIBR (Figure 3, top) , yet requires neither source view synthesis nor paired stereo data. As shown in the green-highlighted regions of Figure 3, the mask-conditioned inpainting process during training matches that at inference, ensuring train-inference consistency. 3.4.3. A PPLICATION OF GRT GRT enables self-supervised training data construction by computing inference-identical disocclusion masks from monocular images (Figure 3, bottom). Each mask can be computed once offline and reused during training. Given a target view IR, we estimate dR = D(IR) and compute 

M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

to construct triplets (Xinput , M L→R 

> dis

, I R)

where Xinput = IR ⊙ (1 − M L→R 

> dis

) with IR as ground truth. The training objective is: 

L = ∥G(Xinput , M L→R 

> dis

) − IR∥. (22) 

Training and evaluation datasets. We construct the first comprehensive datasets for stereo inpainting from widely-adopted benchmarks: ImageNet-GRT and Kinetics-GRT from ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and Kinet-ics (Kay et al., 2017) for training. Building on the estab-lished equivalence (Section 3.4.2), we create DAVIS-GRT from DAVIS (Perazzi et al., 2016) for evaluation (green-highlighted regions, Figure 3) to faithfully reflect real-world inference performance (details in Section A2). 6Geometric Reciprocity Training / Evaluation 

# Inference 

GRT /              

> Figure 3. Equivalence to Full Supervision. Top: inference synthesizes IRfrom ILvia DIBR and obtains ML→R
> dis for inpainting.
> Bottom: GRT treats a monocular frame as IRand computes the same mask analytically from IRalone for training and DAVIS-GRT evaluation.

3.5. Model Architecture 

We adopt LaMa (Suvorov et al., 2022), which leverages Fast Fourier Convolutions, for image stereo inpainting and ProPainter (Zhou et al., 2023) for video stereo inpainting. ProPainter features recurrent flow completion and sparse video transformers to handle temporal consistency. Both models are fine-tuned on ImageNet-GRT and Kinetics-GRT respectively, using a combined loss of L1 and perceptual components. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setup Baselines. For image stereo inpainting, we compare against StereoDiffusion (Wang et al., 2024), ZeroStereo (Wang et al., 2025), and Mono2Stereo (Yu et al., 2025b). For video stereoscopic generation, we evaluate against SVG (Dai et al., 2024) and StereoCrafter (Zhao et al., 2024). We denote our methods as Ours-Image and Ours-Video .

Datasets and Metrics. We conduct evaluations on two com-plementary benchmarks. DAVIS-GRT isolates the stereo inpainting sub-task under geometrically consistent masks with clean ground truth, while Inria 3DMovie evaluates the full left-to-right stereoscopic generation pipeline on real stereo footage. On DAVIS-GRT, which comprises 50 video clips with 3,455 frames, we report PSNR, SSIM (Wang et al., 2004), and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) to assess stereo inpainting quality, along with CLIP Temporal Consistency (CTC), which measures frame-to-frame CLIP feature cosine similarity, to evaluate temporal coherence. Image-based methods are evaluated per-frame on this dataset. Per-frame inference time is reported at 512 ×512 resolution. On the In-ria 3DMovie Dataset (Alahari et al., 2013), which contains 36 stereo video pairs, we evaluate video stereo generation methods using SIoU (Yu et al., 2025b) and MEt3R (Asim et al., 2025) to measure viewing comfort and geometric consistency, reflecting the quality of stereoscopic viewing experience. 

4.2. Quantitative Results DAVIS-GRT. As shown in Table 2, both Ours-Image and Ours-Video achieve superior performance across all met-rics compared to existing methods, while being signifi-cantly faster with inference times of 0.05s and 0.24s per frame, respectively. This improvement stems from our self-supervised training paradigm that ensures train-inference alignment through GRT-derived data, enabling more accu-rate geometric understanding without relying on imperfect stereo pair collections. 

Inria 3DMovie Dataset. Leveraging improved stereo in-7Geometric Reciprocity 

Table 2. DAVIS-GRT stereo inpainting results. Video methods additionally report temporal consistency (CTC).                                         

> Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓CTC ↑Time (s) ↓
> Image Stereo Inpainting
> Mono2Stereo 28.20 0.9250 0.0485 –2.4 ZeroStereo 28.50 0.9280 0.0470 –4.1 StereoDiffusion 29.77 0.9360 0.0411 –10.4
> Ours-Image 35.52 0.9800 0.0129 –0.05
> Video Stereo Inpainting
> SVG 27.33 0.9052 0.0552 0.9721 3.0 StereoCrafter 28.95 0.9501 0.0445 0.9755 0.6
> Ours-Video 34.06 0.9733 0.0210 0.9770 0.24

painting capabilities, our methods deliver more comfortable viewing experiences. As shown in Table 3, Ours-Video demonstrates substantially superior geometric consistency and viewing comfort compared to video stereoscopic gener-ation baselines. 

Table 3. Evaluation on Inria 3DMovie. 

Method SIoU ↑ MEt3R ↓

SVG 0.2160 0.2245 StereoCrafter 0.2201 0.1961 

Ours-Video 0.2516 0.0973 

4.3. Qualitative Results 

Visual comparisons in Figure 4 demonstrate the effective-ness of our approach. We compare against StereoDiffusion, the top-performing image baseline, as well as all video stereo inpainting methods. Our GRT-based training enables precise geometric understanding, producing natural textures in disoccluded regions with smooth boundary transitions. 

4.4. Effectiveness of GRT Training Data 

To validate the broad applicability of GRT-derived train-ing data, we fine-tune several foundation models using our datasets. For images, we adapt LaMa (Suvorov et al., 2022) and pretrained Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) in-painting models (SD1.5, SD2.1, and SDXL); for videos, we fine-tune ProPainter (Zhou et al., 2023) and StereoCrafter. As shown in Table 4, all models achieve substantial im-provements across metrics after fine-tuning on GRT data. Notably, even StereoCrafter, purpose-built for stereoscopic generation, benefits considerably, demonstrating that GRT provides higher-quality supervision than existing stereo pair collection strategies. These results confirm our self-supervised training paradigm is broadly applicable across diverse architectures. Ground Truth Mask Warped Left StereoDiffusion StereoCrafter SVG Ours-Video 

Figure 4. Qualitative comparison. Our method produces more natural textures and smoother boundaries. 

Table 4. GRT fine-tuning results across image and video inpainting backbones. 

Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ CTC ↑

Image Stereo Inpainting 

LaMa 31.75 0.9660 0.0239 –LaMa + GRT 35.52 0.9800 0.0129 –SD1.5 Inpainting 27.38 0.9152 0.0982 –SD1.5 Inpainting + GRT 30.70 0.9574 0.0281 –SD2.1 Inpainting 27.37 0.9143 0.0981 –SD2.1 Inpainting + GRT 28.12 0.9472 0.0419 –SDXL Inpainting 23.40 0.8842 0.1426 –SDXL Inpainting + GRT 29.45 0.9431 0.0481 –

Video Stereo Inpainting 

ProPainter 31.03 0.9648 0.0318 0.9764 ProPainter + GRT 34.06 0.9733 0.0210 0.9770 

StereoCrafter 28.95 0.9501 0.0445 0.9755 StereoCrafter + GRT 30.85 0.9612 0.0298 0.9760 

8Geometric Reciprocity 

## 5. Conclusion 

We present a self-supervised framework for training stereo inpainting networks from monocular videos, addressing the data bottleneck in monocular-to-stereo conversion. Our key contribution is the Geometric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT): under the stated DIBR formulation, the disocclusion mask for a target view equals the pixels lost when warping back to source. This enables computing training masks from depth alone, eliminating stereo pairs or synthetic data. We achieve state-of-the-art quality with scalable training from real-world videos. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council – General Research Fund (Grant Nos. 17213825 and 17211024), Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission – Innovation and Technology Fund (Project No. ITS/488/24FP), and HKU Seed Fund for PI Research. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of machine learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Alahari, K., Seguin, G., Sivic, J., and Laptev, I. Pose estima-tion and segmentation of people in 3d movies. In ICCV ,2013. Asim, M., Wewer, C., Wimmer, T., Schiele, B., and Lenssen, J. E. Met3r: Measuring multi-view consistency in gener-ated images. In CVPR , 2025. Bochkovskii, A., Delaunoy, A., Germain, H., Santos, M., Zhou, Y., Richter, S. R., and Koltun, V. Depth pro: Sharp monocular metric depth in less than a second. In ICLR ,2025. Chen, S., Guo, H., Zhu, S., Zhang, F., Huang, Z., Feng, J., and Kang, B. Video depth anything: Consistent depth estimation for super-long videos. In CVPR , 2025. Dai, P., Tan, F., Xu, Q., Futschik, D., Du, R., Fanello, S., Qi, X., and Zhang, Y. SVG: 3D stereoscopic video generation via denoising frame matrix. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00367 , 2024. Dwibedi, D., Aytar, Y., Tompson, J., Sermanet, P., and Zisserman, A. Temporal cycle-consistency learning. In 

CVPR , 2019. Geiger, A., Lenz, P., and Urtasun, R. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite. In 

CVPR , 2012. Greff, K., Belletti, F., Beyer, L., Doersch, C., Du, Y., Duck-worth, D., Fleet, D. J., Gnanapragasam, D., Golemo, F., Herrmann, C., et al. Kubric: A scalable dataset generator. In CVPR , 2022. Hoffman, J., Tzeng, E., Park, T., Zhu, J.-Y., Isola, P., Saenko, K., Efros, A., and Darrell, T. Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain adaptation. In ICML , 2018. Huang, X., Singh, A. K., Dubost, F., Vasconcelos, C. N., Khattar, S., Shi, L., Theobalt, C., Oztireli, C., and Singh, G. ReStereo: Diffusion stereo video generation and restoration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06023 , 2025. Kay, W., Carreira, J., Simonyan, K., Zhang, B., Hillier, C., Vijayanarasimhan, S., Viola, F., Green, T., Back, T., Natsev, P., et al. The Kinetics human action video dataset. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950 , 2017. Ke, B., Obukhov, A., Huang, S., Metzger, N., Daudt, R. C., and Schindler, K. Repurposing diffusion-based image generators for monocular depth estimation. In CVPR ,2024. Kong, L., Xie, S., Hu, H., Ng, L. X., Cottereau, B., and Ooi, W. T. RoboDepth: Robust out-of-distribution depth estimation under corruptions. In NeurIPS , 2023. Lin, H., Chen, S., Liew, J., Chen, D. Y., Li, Z., Shi, G., Feng, J., and Kang, B. Depth anything 3: Recovering the visual space from any views. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10647 ,2025. Min, J., Kim, J., Min, C.-H., Kim, M., Jeon, Y., and Choi, M. DepthFocus: Controllable depth estimation for see-through scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16993 , 2025. Perazzi, F., Pont-Tuset, J., McWilliams, B., Van Gool, L., Gross, M., and Sorkine-Hornung, A. A benchmark dataset and evaluation methodology for video object seg-mentation. In CVPR , 2016. Ranftl, R., Lasinger, K., Hafner, D., Schindler, K., and Koltun, V. Towards robust monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE TPAMI , 2020. Ranftl, R., Bochkovskiy, A., and Koltun, V. Vision trans-formers for dense prediction. In ICCV , 2021. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR , 2022. 9Geometric Reciprocity 

Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bern-stein, M., et al. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV , 2015. Shi, J., Wang, Q., Li, Z., Idoughi, R., and Wonka, P. StereoCrafter-Zero: Zero-shot stereo video generation with noisy restart. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14295 ,2024. Shvetsova, N., Bhat, G., Truong, P., Kuehne, H., and Tombari, F. M2SVid: End-to-end inpainting and refine-ment for monocular-to-stereo video conversion. In Inter-national Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2026. Silberman, N., Hoiem, D., Kohli, P., and Fergus, R. Indoor segmentation and support inference from rgbd images. In 

ECCV , 2012. Singh, A. CLDA: Contrastive learning for semi-supervised domain adaptation. In NeurIPS , 2021. Sun, B., Jin, M., Yin, B., and Hou, Q. Depth anything at any condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01634 , 2025. Suvorov, R., Logacheva, E., Mashikhin, A., Remizova, A., Ashukha, A., Silvestrov, A., Kong, N., Goka, H., Park, K., and Lempitsky, V. Resolution-robust large mask in-painting with Fourier convolutions. In WACV , 2022. Wang, L., Frisvad, J. R., Jensen, M. B., and Bigdeli, S. A. Stereodiffusion: Training-free stereo image generation using latent diffusion models. In CVPR , 2024. Wang, X., Yang, H., Xu, G., Cheng, J., Lin, M., Deng, Y., Zang, J., Chen, Y., and Yang, X. ZeroStereo: Zero-shot stereo matching from single images. In ICCV , 2025. Wang, Z., Bovik, A. C., Sheikh, H. R., and Simoncelli, E. P. Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE TIP , 2004. Xie, J., Girshick, R., and Farhadi, A. Deep3d: Fully auto-matic 2d-to-3d video conversion with deep convolutional neural networks. In ECCV , 2016. Yang, C., Lamdouar, H., Lu, E., Zisserman, A., and Xie, W. Self-supervised video object segmentation by motion grouping. In ICCV , 2021. Yang, L., Kang, B., Huang, Z., Xu, X., Feng, J., and Zhao, H. Depth anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. In CVPR , 2024. Yu, M., Hu, W., Xing, J., and Shan, Y. Trajectorycrafter: Redirecting camera trajectory for monocular videos via diffusion models. In ICCV , 2025a. Yu, S., Chen, Y., Qi, Z., Xie, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, L., Shan, Y., and Lu, H. Mono2stereo: A benchmark and empirical study for stereo conversion. In CVPR , 2025b. Yuan, Y., Liu, S., Zhang, J., Zhang, Y., Dong, C., and Lin, L. Unsupervised image super-resolution using cycle-in-cycle generative adversarial networks. In CVPRW , 2018. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A. A., Shechtman, E., and Wang, O. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR , 2018. Zhao, S., Hu, W., Cun, X., Zhang, Y., Li, X., Kong, Z., Gao, X., Niu, M., and Shan, Y. StereoCrafter: Diffusion-based generation of long and high-fidelity stereoscopic 3D from monocular videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07447 ,2024. Zheng, Y., Zhong, C., Li, P., Gao, H.-a., Zheng, Y., Jin, B., Wang, L., Zhao, H., Zhou, G., Zhang, Q., et al. STEPS: Joint self-supervised nighttime image enhancement and depth estimation. In ICRA , 2023. Zhou, S., Li, C., Chan, K. C., and Loy, C. C. Propainter: Im-proving propagation and transformer for video inpainting. In ICCV , 2023. Zhou, T., Krahenbuhl, P., Aubry, M., Huang, Q., and Efros, A. A. Learning dense correspondence via 3d-guided cycle consistency. In CVPR , 2016. Zhu, J.-Y., Park, T., Isola, P., and Efros, A. A. Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adver-sarial networks. In ICCV , 2017. 10 Geometric Reciprocity 

## A1. Code and Data Release 

The project repository is https://github.com/ Visual-AI/GRT . We will release source code, precom-puted GRT masks, and trained weights under the Apache 2.0 license. 

## A2. Dataset Details 

We construct three datasets by applying the Geometric Reci-procity Theorem (GRT) (Section 3.4) to widely-adopted vision benchmarks. For each image or video frame, we treat it as a right (target) view, estimate its monocular depth, and compute a binary disocclusion mask M L→R 

> dis

following the GRT procedure. This yields self-supervised training samples and test-aligned evaluation samples for stereo in-painting, where each RGB image or frame is paired with its corresponding GRT-derived disocclusion mask. 

Depth estimation and GRT mask generation. We use Depth Anything V2-Large (Yang et al., 2024) to estimate monocular depth for each image or frame, following previ-ous stereoscopic video generation literature. The predicted relative (inverse) depth is converted to a disparity map and linearly rescaled to [0 , αW ], where W is the image width and α = 0 .1 for training and α = 0 .06 for evaluation. We then apply the GRT procedure (Section 3.4) to compute 

M L→R 

> dis

by identifying lost pixels through boundary viola-tions and depth occlusions. On average, disoccluded regions comprise approximately 10% of pixels for training data. Note that our framework flexibly accommodates alterna-tive depth estimators, such as Video Depth Anything (Chen et al., 2025) for temporally consistent depth, Depth Any-thing V3 (Lin et al., 2025) for metric depth, or DepthFo-cus (Min et al., 2025) for multi-layer depth to handle trans-parent surfaces. We adopt Depth Anything V2 to follow prior works and ensure fair comparisons. 

ImageNet-GRT. ImageNet-GRT uses the complete ImageNet-1K training split (Russakovsky et al., 2015), con-taining ∼1.28M images across 1,000 object categories. We utilize all images without filtering and disregard class la-bels, treating ImageNet purely as a diverse source of natural imagery. 

Kinetics-GRT. Kinetics-GRT uses the Kinetics-400 training split (Kay et al., 2017), comprising ∼240K videos across 400 human action categories with rich temporal dynamics and camera motion. We decode all frames at their original resolution and frame rate while preserving temporal order. 

DAVIS-GRT. DAVIS-GRT uses all 50 videos (3,455 frames) from DAVIS 2016 (Perazzi et al., 2016), a video segmen-tation benchmark known for high-quality annotations and challenging scenarios. DAVIS-GRT serves exclusively for testing; no DAVIS frames are used during training or model selection, ensuring unbiased assessment of generalization. 

## A3. Pseudocode 

We provide pseudocode in Figure A1 implementing the Geo-metric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT) presented in Section 3.4. Given a disparity map, the function computes the disocclu-sion mask by identifying pixels that would be lost during warping due to boundary violations or depth occlusions. 

## A4. Model Architecture and Training 

Our model builds upon the LaMa architecture (Suvorov et al., 2022) with Fast Fourier Convolutions (FFC) for image stereo inpainting, and ProPainter (Zhou et al., 2023) for video stereo inpainting. 

A4.1. Image Stereo Inpainting Architecture. We use the Big LaMa-Fourier generator (27M parameters): 3 downsampling blocks, 9 FFC-based residual blocks, and 3 upsampling blocks. The network takes 4-channel input (masked RGB + mask) and outputs 3-channel RGB. FFC blocks provide image-wide receptive fields by processing features in both spatial (local) and fre-quency (global) domains. 

Training. We fine-tune the model on ImageNet-GRT with realistic disocclusion masks generated via GRT for 30 epochs at 256 × 256 resolution. We use combined L1 and LPIPS loss with Adam optimizer (learning rate 10 −4), batch size 32, and cosine annealing scheduler on two NVIDIA V100 GPUs. 

A4.2. Video Stereo Inpainting Architecture. We adopt ProPainter which comprises three key components: (1) Recurrent Flow Completion (RFC) network that completes corrupted optical flows using de-formable alignment with 8× downsampled features; (2) Dual-domain propagation combining global image propaga-tion (with flow consistency check) and local feature propaga-tion (flow-guided deformable alignment); (3) Mask-guided sparse video Transformer with 8 blocks, window size 5 × 9,and extended size equal to half of the window size. The Transformer applies sparse attention only to query windows intersecting mask regions and uses temporal stride of 2 for key/value space to reduce redundancy. 

Training. We fine-tune from pretrained ProPainter weights on Kinetics-GRT for 10,000 steps at 432 × 240 resolution. We use combined L1 reconstruction loss and T-PatchGAN adversarial loss (weight 0.01) with Adam optimizer (learn-ing rate 10 −4) and batch size 8. The model processes local sequences of length 10 during training and length 20 during inference on two NVIDIA V100 GPUs. 11 Geometric Reciprocity  

> 1

def compute_grt_mask(disparity, direction=’R2L’):  

> 2

"""  

> 3

Compute GRT-based disocclusion mask via geometric warping.  

> 45

Args:  

> 6

disparity: [B,H,W] disparity map (positive values)  

> 7

direction: ’R2L’ for right-to-left warp (finds L->R disocclusions)  

> 8

’L2R’ for left-to-right warp (finds R->L disocclusions)  

> 9

Returns:  

> 10

mask: [B,H,W] binary mask (True = disoccluded pixel)  

> 11

"""  

> 12

B, H, W = disparity.shape  

> 13 14

# Compute target positions after warping  

> 15

x = torch.arange(W)[None, None, :] # [1,1,W]  

> 16

if direction == ’R2L’:  

> 17

x_target = round(x + disparity) # Right-to-left warp  

> 18

else: # L2R  

> 19

x_target = round(x - disparity) # Left-to-right warp  

> 20 21

# Mask 1: Out-of-bounds pixels (boundary violations)  

> 22

mask_oob = (x_target < 0) | (x_target >= W)  

> 23 24

# Mask 2: Occluded pixels (depth ordering conflicts)  

> 25

# When multiple pixels map to same target, keep only the closest (max disparity)  

> 26

valid_idx = torch.where(˜mask_oob)  

> 27

x_tgt = x_target[valid_idx]  

> 28

d_src = disparity[valid_idx]  

> 29 30

# Find winning disparity at each target position  

> 31

d_winner = scatter_max(d_src, index=x_tgt, dim_size=W) # [B,H,W]  

> 32 33

# Mark projected pixels that lost the depth competition  

> 34

mask_occ = torch.zeros_like(mask_oob)  

> 35

is_occluded = (d_src < d_winner[valid_idx])  

> 36

mask_occ[valid_idx][is_occluded] = True  

> 37 38

# Combine both invalidation conditions  

> 39

return mask_oob | mask_occ 

Figure A1. Pseudocode implementing the Geometric Reciprocity Theorem (GRT). Given a disparity map, the function computes the disocclusion mask by identifying pixels lost during warping due to boundary violations ( mask oob ) or depth occlusions ( mask occ ). 

12 Geometric Reciprocity 

## A5. Additional Analyses 

Naive cycle consistency. GRT precomputes masks of-fline and reduces online optimization to standard inpaint-ing, while naive cycle consistency requires multiple sequen-tial model inferences and gradient approximations through warping. A controlled LaMa comparison is summarized in Table A1. 

Table A1. Efficiency and quality comparison with naive cycle consistency.                

> Method Steps/s ↑Memory ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> Naive Cycle Consistency 0.6 19 GB 32.14 0.9663 0.0271 GRT 1.9 11 GB 33.10 0.9718 0.0232

Mask agreement. We compare analytically computed GRT masks with cycle-consistency masks under different depth and warping settings. The high agreement in Table A2 indi-cates that the derived masks capture the same disocclusion structure in practice. 

Table A2. Pixel-level mask agreement with GRT masks.     

> Setting Agreement (%) ↑
> Cycle consistency, depth-consistent 100.0 Cycle consistency, independently estimated 99.1 Bilinear warping vs. nearest-neighbor GRT 99.5

Depth estimator robustness. GRT is depth-estimator-agnostic and only requires a disparity map as input. Ta-ble A3 shows that performance degrades gradually with weaker depth backbones but remains close. 

Table A3. Depth estimator sensitivity on Inria 3DMovie. 

Depth Estimator SIoU ↑ MEt3R ↓

Depth Anything V2-Large 0.2516 0.0973 

Depth Anything V2-Base 0.2489 0.1012 Depth Anything V1-Small 0.2451 0.1058 

GRT mask components. The boundary-violation and depth-occlusion terms are jointly required to identify ge-ometrically lost pixels. Ablating either component degrades downstream inpainting quality. 

Data scaling. Because GRT requires no paired stereo cap-ture, it can benefit from larger monocular video corpora. Table A5 shows monotonic gains as the training set grows. 

## A6. Limitations 

GRT inherits the assumptions of DIBR-based stereoscopic generation. It relies on rectified stereo geometry and the quality of the input disparity map; transparent or reflec-tive surfaces, inaccurate depth discontinuities, and non-Lambertian effects can therefore lead to incorrect masks 

Table A4. Ablation of GRT mask components on LaMa trained with ImageNet-GRT. 

Mask Configuration PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

Boundary violation only 32.89 0.9694 0.0200 Depth occlusion only 32.54 0.9676 0.0216 Full GRT mask 35.52 0.9800 0.0129 

Table A5. Dataset scale ablation for ProPainter trained on GRT data.                         

> Training Data Scale PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓CTC ↑
> 0% (pretrained) 31.03 0.9648 0.0318 0.9764 10% ( ∼24K videos) 31.88 0.9672 0.0274 0.9765 50% ( ∼120K videos) 33.45 0.9710 0.0241 0.9768 100% ( ∼240K videos) 34.06 0.9733 0.0210 0.9770 Kinetics-700 ( ∼650K videos) 34.83 0.9751 0.0188 0.9774

or visually implausible inpainting. The nearest-neighbor formulation gives exact mask consistency under the theorem statement, while bilinear interpolation introduces a small approximation gap as discussed in Section A9. 

## A7. Discussion of General Inpainting Models 

General-purpose image inpainting models are designed to fill large contiguous missing regions by hallucinating plau-sible content from surrounding context. While these models are powerful, stereo disocclusions present a fundamentally different mask pattern. Disocclusion masks are thin, elon-gated, and scattered along depth discontinuities at object boundaries, with significantly smaller total area compared to typical inpainting masks. More critically, disocclusions reveal previously hidden background content that is often vi-sually and semantically distinct from the adjacent occluding foreground. For example, a disocclusion behind a person might expose a wall or furniture with no visual similarity to the person’s appearance. This domain gap in both mask geometry and content semantics causes general inpainting models to produce inferior results on stereo disocclusions. As we demonstrate in Figure A2, while these models suc-ceed on large contiguous masks, they fail on the thin scat-tered masks characteristic of stereo disocclusions. 

## A8. Training Data Challenges 

Constructing high-quality training data remains a signifi-cant bottleneck for stereo inpainting. Methods relying on real stereo pairs, such as StereoCrafter (Zhao et al., 2024), face a fundamental paradox: they rely on stereo match-ing algorithms to extract pixel correspondences from stereo pairs and subsequently derive disocclusion masks, yet stereo matching itself is prone to errors and particularly unreli-able in disoccluded regions. As shown in Fig. A3, stereo matching produces distorted masks with alignment errors. 13 Geometric Reciprocity Masked Input Result Masked Input Result  

> General Inpainting Stereo Inpainting

Figure A2. Performance of SDXL Inpainting on different mask patterns. The model handles large contiguous masks well (General Inpainting) but struggles with thin scattered disocclusion masks along object boundaries (Stereo Inpainting). Mask Original Masked Input Mask Masked Input  

> Stereo Matching GRT (Ours)

Figure A3. Stereo matching methods produce distorted disocclu-sion masks and misaligned inpainting triplets. Our GRT approach generates geometrically accurate masks at test-time. 

StereoCrafter confirms this limitation, acknowledging the prevalence of large stereo matching errors that force them to employ complex manual alignment and aggressive fil-tering strategies (e.g., discarding samples where warping PSNR < 25 dB), resulting in substantial data waste. Alter-natively, approaches utilizing synthetic data (Huang et al., 2025) provide precise geometry but suffer from inevitable 

Sim2Real domain gaps . Our GRT-based approach resolves these dilemmas by deriving geometrically consistent masks directly from monocular data, avoiding both error-prone matching and synthetic domain shifts. 

## A9. Extension to Soft Interpolation Warping 

The GRT proof in Section 3.4.1 assumes nearest-neighbor warping, where each pixel (xR, y R) maps to discrete coordi-nates (xL, y L) = (round( xR + dR(xR, y R)) , y R). In prac-tice, bilinear warping is sometimes preferred for smoother synthesis. We show that GRT extends to this soft interpo-lation setting by reformulating the problem at the renderer level rather than the pixel level, though this introduces a subtle train-test consistency trade-off. 

Renderer-based formulation. Under bilinear warping, we treat each pixel (xR, y R) in the right view IR as a renderer that carries appearance and geometry information. Each renderer projects to continuous coordinates: 

x′ 

> L

= xR + dR(xR, y R), y′ 

> L

= yR, (23) and distributes its contribution to a 2 × 2 neighborhood in the left view via bilinear weights wxR,y R (xL, y L). This splatting process synthesizes the left view as a weighted blend of renderer contributions. 

Forward warping with occlusion handling. For each left-view pixel (xL, y L), let S(xL, y L) denote all renderers whose bilinear kernels overlap it. To handle occlusions, we maintain a depth buffer that tracks the maximum disparity among contributing renderers: 

dmax  

> L

(xL, y L) = max  

> (xR,y R)∈S(xL,y L)

dR(xR, y R). (24) Only renderers at maximum disparity are retained, as nearer objects occlude farther ones. Let Smax (xL, y L) denote ren-derers at maximum disparity: 

Smax (xL, y L) = {(xR, y R) ∈ S(xL, y L) : 

dR(xR, y R) = dmax  

> L

(xL, y L)}. (25) The warped left view is synthesized as: 

˜IL(xL, y L) = 

P 

> (xR,y R)∈Smax

wxR,y R · IR(xR, y R)

P 

> (xR,y R)∈Smax

wxR,y R

,

(26) where we abbreviate Smax (xL, y L) as Smax for notational simplicity. 

Lost renderer criteria. A renderer (xR, y R) is lost if it fails to contribute to any left-view pixel. This occurs under two conditions. First, boundary violation occurs when the renderer’s bilinear kernel support lies entirely outside the valid image domain: 

M R→L 

> oob

(xR, y R) = I [⌊x′

> L

⌋, ⌈x′

> L

⌉ /∈ [−1, W ]] , (27) where the range [−1, W ] ensures at least one neighbor in 

[0 , W ) has non-zero weight. Second, depth occlusion occurs when the renderer is occluded at all left-view locations in its support. Let S∗(xR, y R) denote valid left-view pixels overlapping (xR, y R)’s bilinear kernel. The occlusion mask is: 

M R→L 

> occl

(xR, y R) = IdR(xR, y R) < d max  

> L

(xL, y L),

∀(xL, y L) ∈ S∗(xR, y R). (28) The complete lost mask combines both conditions: 

M R→L 

> lost

= M R→L 

> oob

∨ M R→L 

> occl

. (29) 

GRT validity at the renderer level. The Geometric Reci-procity relation M L→R 

> dis

= M R→L 

> lost

continues to hold when 14 Geometric Reciprocity 

formulated at the renderer level. The three-step simplifi-cation in Section 3.4.1 remains geometrically valid: disoc-cluded regions lack scene correspondence, each renderer co-transfers disparity with its appearance, and renderers completing the round-trip return to their original positions. Therefore, lost renderers in the forward pass correspond exactly to disoccluded regions in the backward pass. 

Train-test consistency. While GRT holds mathematically at the renderer level, bilinear warping introduces a subtle inconsistency. During training, M R→L 

> lost

is computed from discrete renderers in the original image IR. During testing, the synthesized view ˆIL contains blended pixel values, and backward warping treats each blended pixel as a single ren-derer rather than the multiple discrete renderers that created it. This approximation causes slight differences in disoc-clusion masks, though the effect is minor for typical stereo baseline ranges. 

Implementation. We adopt nearest-neighbor warping to maintain consistency with the theorem statement and to improve computational efficiency. Both variants produce vi-sually similar results, while nearest-neighbor warping keeps training masks aligned with the stereoscopic generation pipeline. 15