Title: REST3D: Reconstructing Physically Stable 3D Scenes from a Single Image

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30338v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:54:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# REST3D: Reconstructing Physically Stable 3D Scenes from a Single Image 

## Xiaoxuan Ma Jiashun Wang Nicol´ as Ugrinovic Yehonathan Litman Kris Kitani Carnegie Mellon University Image Prior work Ours     

> Initial state Final state
> Simulation-ready Interactive Scene
> ……
> …
> Initial state Final state Exo-view
> …
> Ego-view

Figure 1. We reconstruct physically stable 3D scenes from a single image, ensuring both visual consistency and physical plausibility. 

Prior work [6] often produces physically implausible scenes, leading to unstable states when imported into a simulator [20], while ours obtains stable layouts that are ready for simulation, enabling seamless human–object interaction in VR environments. Project page: 

https://shirleymaxx.github.io/REST3D/ .

## Abstract 

Reconstructing physically stable 3D scenes from a single RGB image enables casual images to be converted into simulation-ready digital assets for applications such as im-mersive interaction and content creation. However, exist-ing single-image reconstruction methods fall short in cap-turing the physical structure of a scene. As a result, they often produce geometrically plausible but physically in-consistent results, including object floating and penetra-tion, which lead to unstable behavior in physics simula-tions. Image-conditioned scene generation methods im-prove physical plausibility but often rely on strong scene priors, yielding plausible yet inaccurate object arrange-ments that fail to match the input image. We propose REST3D, a single-image reconstruction framework that can REconstruct physically STable 3D scenes by integrating physical scene understanding with physics-constrained re-finement. We first introduce an agentic physical scene understanding technique that constructs a scene-tree rep-resentation capturing object physical states and inter-object relationships from a gravity-support perspective, providing a structural prior for reconstruction. Leverag-ing this structure, we initialize the scene using image-to-3D models, followed by scene-tree-guided alignment and physics-constrained optimization to resolve physical viola-tions while preserving visual consistency with the input im-age. Experiments show that our method significantly re-duces physical errors and improves simulation stability on both synthetic and real-world datasets while maintaining strong reconstruction quality. We further demonstrate the reconstructed scenes in VR-based human–object interac-tion, showing their potential for immersive applications. 

## 1. Introduction 

Reconstructing physically stable 3D scenes from a single RGB image enables the conversion of casual captures into simulation-ready digital assets for applications such as im-mersive interaction, content creation, and gaming [38], etc .Unlike multi-view or video inputs [23, 38], the single-image setting is inherently more challenging due to limited vi-sual observations. Nevertheless, a single image still con-tains rich information about the physical structure of the world such as object presence, geometry, appearance, and the physical contact between objects. Despite rapid progress in single-image 3D reconstruc-tion, existing methods [1, 6, 22, 25, 27, 30, 33] often pro-duce physically invalid results. Objects that should rest on supporting surfaces may float, while nearby objects 

> arXiv:2605.30338v1 [cs.CV] 28 May 2026

may penetrate each other, leading to unstable behavior in physics simulation (see the collapsed final states in Fig. 1). Retrieval-based approaches such as DigitalCousins [9] at-tempt to improve physical plausibility by assembling scenes using retrieved 3D assets, but are constrained by the cover-age of the 3D asset database and often yield mismatched ob-jects. More recently, conditional scene generation methods [26, 35, 40] leverage agents to synthesize scenes from text or images. While capable of generating physically plausible layouts, these approaches often rely on strong learned scene priors, producing plausible but inaccurate object arrange-ments that fail to faithfully reproduce the observed scene. In short, existing approaches either appear visually cor-rect but fail to satisfy physical constraints, or remain phys-ically valid but fail to recover the scene layout consis-tent with the input image. To address this, we propose REST3D, a single-image reconstruction framework that can REconstruct physically STable 3D scenes by integrating physical scene understanding with physics-constrained re-finement (see Fig. 2). We first design an agentic physical scene understanding technique built on Vision-Language Model (VLM)s to infer a scene-tree structure that captures object physical states and inter-object relationships ( e.g ., is vertically supported by X), enabling physically grounded reconstruction. Leveraging this structure, we initialize the scene using image-to-3D models [6], and perform scene-tree-guided alignment and physics-constrained optimiza-tion to resolve physical errors while preserving visual con-sistency with the image. Specifically, we adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy to refine the scene layout and resolve physical errors by decomposing the scene into hierarchical groups according to the scene tree. We perform local refine-ment within each group, followed by global optimization over the entire scene to further refine the scene layout. Experiments show that our method significantly reduces physical errors and outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets in terms of reconstruction quality and physical stability, achieving an 83%-point improvement in stability over SOTA method [6]. Extensive ablation studies validate the effectiveness of the proposed scene-tree representation for physically grounded reconstruction. Additionally, we implemented an interac-tive VR system that reconstructs an immersive and phys-ically grounded 3D scene from a single image, enabling users to naturally interact with stable virtual objects through hand-based interactions. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We introduce an agentic physical scene understanding technique that infers a scene-tree representation captur-ing object-level physical states and relationships, serving as the foundation for physically grounded reconstruction. • Leveraging the scene-tree, we propose a framework that integrates scene understanding with physics-constrained optimization, correcting physical violations while pre-serving visual consistency with the input image. • Our method achieves SOTA physical stability and recon-struction quality on both synthetic and real-world data, enabling stable simulation and immersive interaction. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. 3D Scene Reconstruction 

3D scene reconstruction has been studied under various in-put modalities, including RGB-D scans or videos [2, 14, 21], point clouds [13, 15], and multi-view RGB images or videos [23, 24, 32, 37–39]. While these methods achieve ac-curate reconstructions, they often require specialized sens-ing setups or dense viewpoints. Single-image reconstruction has recently gained traction due to its practicality. Early methods [25, 27, 33] use ResNet or 3D CNNs to predict voxel occupancy, but are limited to predefined object categories. Recent approaches [1, 22, 30], such as Gen3DSR [1] and SceneGen [22], leverage foundation model priors, e.g ., image-to-3D mod-els like TREELIS [41], to reconstruct more complete scenes from a single image. SAM3D [6] further improves recon-struction quality but mainly focuses on individual objects rather than holistic scenes. With the emergence of Large Language Models (LLM)s and VLMs, recent works incor-porate vision-language reasoning and retrieval into recon-struction [7, 9, 16, 19, 44]. DigitalCousins [9] reconstruct scenes by retrieving and composing similar 3D assets, but this retrieval-based paradigm is constrained by the asset database, often yielding mismatched assets that differ sig-nificantly from the input image. These approaches mainly focus on visual reconstruction, while overlooking scene-level physical plausibility. In con-trast, our method leverages image-to-3D priors for recon-struction fidelity while explicitly enforcing physical con-straints for simulation-ready 3D scenes. 

2.2. 3D Scene Generation 

With the rapid development of generative models and LLMs, recent works have shifted toward 3D scene synthe-sis. Early works [17, 34, 42] generate scenes from text de-scriptions. Recent methods incorporate multimodal reason-ing and physical awareness, with some focusing on table-top scenes [18, 35]. Further approaches [5, 26, 40, 44] ex-plore agentic pipelines for scene generation from prompts. Some methods [35, 40] first convert text into intermedi-ate images before 3D generation, partially resembling re-construction. However, agent-based systems often produce heuristic, template-like scenes and are difficult to control, leading to failure cases and misalignment when applied to real-world reconstruction. In contrast, single-image recon-struction is more constrained, requiring recovery of a scene consistent with the input observation. In this work, we adopt an agent-assisted design but avoid fully agent-driven generation. Instead, we decompose the task into well-defined sub-problems, enabling more con-trolled and reliable reconstruction from casual images. 

## 3. Method 

Given a single RGB image I, our goal is to recon-struct a physically plausible 3D scene S, including object meshes and their corresponding world-frame layout ready for physics simulation. Fig. 2 illustrates our overall frame-work, which consists of three stages. First, Scene-Tree Construction (Sec. 3.1) infers a hierarchical scene tree that encodes object physical states and their spatial relation-ships. Next, Scene Initialization and Canonicalization 

(Sec. 3.2) initializes a 3D scene and performs scene-tree-guided canonicalization to produce a structured initial lay-out. Finally, Physics-Constrained Optimization (Sec. 3.3) refines object poses through simulation-based optimization under physical constraints, resulting in a physically consis-tent scene while preserving the visual consistency. 

3.1. Scene Tree Construction 

To enable automatic reconstruction from arbitrary images, we decompose the process into three steps with specialized physical scene understanding agents: (i) open-vocabulary object list analysis for scene object identification; (ii) agen-tic instance segmentation for per-object masks; and (iii) scene-tree construction via spatial relationship reasoning (see Stage 1 in Fig. 2). 

Open-vocabulary Object List Analysis. We first identify all objects in the input image. Specifically, we design a scene analyzer that leverages a VLM ( i.e ., Gemini) to gen-erate a structured open-vocabulary object list. Instead of producing coarse category labels like “plant”, we encour-age the model to distinguish individual instances within the same category by incorporating disambiguating attributes such as relative position ( e.g ., “plant on dining table”). This results in an object list with descriptive attributes, denoted as O = {O i}. See Supp. Sec. A for more details. 

Agentic Instance Segmentation. Given each object de-scription Oi, we could leverage SAM3 [4] to obtain its seg-mentation mask. However, due to occlusions and complex-ity in real-world scenes, directly using Oi as input to SAM3 may lead to inaccurate results. Therefore, we build an agen-tic system that integrates instance segmentation with visual-language reasoning, consisting of two specialized agents: a 

segmentation agent Aseg , which performs object segmenta-tion, and a verifier agent Aver , which evaluates the quality of the segmented mask. At each iteration, Aseg refines Oi

into a more detailed prompt tailored for SAM3 to gener-ate a candidate mask. The predicted mask is then overlaid on the input image and passed to Aver , which determines whether it matches the target object description. Based on the verifier’s feedback, Aseg further refines the prompt and repeats this process. The loop terminates when the verifier 

Aver confirms the mask or determines that the object is ab-sent from the scene. This iterative process produces a set of segmentation masks M = {M i} for all objects, where each mask Mi is associated with a unique object description Oi. See Supp. Sec. A for more details. 

Scene Tree Construction via Spatial Reasoning. Given object identifiers O and segmentation masks M, we con-struct a support-relation scene tree T that captures the phys-ical layout of the scene via a spatial reasoning module. Specifically, the scene tree is rooted at four canonical sup-port nodes: ground , wall , ceiling , and ground-wall . We infer support relations by analyzing mask-overlaid object pairs (Mi, Mj ) using a VLM, which determines both the support parent and relation type ( i.e ., on , hanging , or at-tached to ) from a gravity-aware perspective. For example, as shown in Fig. 2, a table is assigned to the ground as its parent with an on relation, while a potted plant placed on the table is assigned to the table as its parent with the same relation. For objects supported by multiple surfaces, such as a radiator contacting both the ground and a wall, we assign the composite parent ground-wall to represent this dual-support situation. We refer the reader to Supp. Sec. A for more details. 

T encodes each object’s support parent and hierarchical spatial relationships, providing a structured prior for layout initialization (Sec. 3.2) and physics-constrained optimiza-tion (Sec. 3.3). 

3.2. Scene Initialization and Canonicalization 

Given the scene tree T and instance masks M, we first obtain a raw 3D scene reconstruction Sraw via an image-to-3D model, followed by a scene-tree-guided canonical-ization that corrects global orientation and enforces coarse support constraints, yielding a physically meaningful initial scene Scano (see Stage 2 in Fig. 2). 

Object Reconstruction and Scene Initialization. For each object, we leverage an image-to-3D model, i.e . SAM3D [6], to reconstruct individual object meshes {Mi} from their masks M. We further utilize the estimated rotation, trans-lation, and scale for each object from SAM3D to initialize scene Sraw in the world frame. However, despite provid-ing an initial scene reconstruction, Sraw is often physically inconsistent. In particular, the estimated global pose may be inaccurate and globally misaligned, with frequent inter-object collisions. For example, the table may appear float-ing, while the plant penetrates the tabletop in Sraw in Fig. 2. Stage3 Physics -Constrained Optimization Stage1 Scene Tree Construction              

> Physics
> Simulator
> (a) Local Group Optimization
> (b) Global Layout Optimization
> Segmented Objects
> Group: Table
> …
> Table
> Plant Napkin Placemat
> Final Scene
> Image
> Scene Seg.
> Ground
> Dining table
> White radiator
> White trash can
> Plant on dining table
> …
> Spatial
> Reasoning
> Image -
> to -3D
> Scene Tree
> Stage2 Scene Canonicalization
> Canonicalization
> 𝑌′
> 𝑌
> Penetration
> Canonicalized Scene
> 𝑌
> Raw Scene
> Penetration
> Update Elite set
> Art “attach”
> Wall
> Ground
> ”on” Dining table
> Scene Tree
> Sampling
> Sampling

Figure 2. REST3D overview. Given a single RGB image I, our goal is to reconstruct a physically plausible 3D scene S ready for physics simulation. Our pipeline consists of three stages: (1) Scene-Tree Construction (Sec. 3.1), which first infers a hierarchical scene tree T

capturing objects and their spatial relationships; (2) Scene Initialization and Canonicalization (Sec. 3.2), where we obtain a raw 3D reconstruction Sraw and perform scene-tree-guided canonicalization to correct global orientation and enforce coarse support constraints, yielding an initial scene Scano ; and (3) Physics-Constrained Optimization (Sec. 3.3), which refines object poses via simulation-based optimization under physical constraints to obtain the final scene S that is both visually and physically consistent. 

When directly imported into a physics simulator, such in-consistencies result in unstable dynamics. 

Scene Canonicalization. To address these issues, we per-form coarse scene canonicalization guided by the scene tree 

T , aiming to align the scene with gravity and enforce hi-erarchical support constraints. We first correct the global orientation. The reconstructed scene often exhibits an arbi-trary up direction misaligned with gravity. Using the scene tree, we estimate the dominant vertical direction Y ′ from ground-supported objects and large furniture anchors. The scene is then globally rotated to align Y ′ with the world 

Y -axis (opposite to gravity), as shown in Fig. 2. We fur-ther enforce coarse spatial consistency using the hierarchi-cal support relations in T . Traversing the tree, we adjust object positions according to parent-child relations, trans-lating each child along the vertical direction to lie on its supporting surface and resolving vertical penetrations. This produces a more physically plausible initialization 

Scano , but residual inconsistencies ( e.g . inter-object intersec-tions) may remain and lead to instability in physics simu-lation. We therefore introduce a scene-tree-guided physics-constrained optimization (Sec. 3.3) to further improve phys-ical consistency. Our method is model-agnostic and can in-corporate improved VLM or image-to-3D methods. 

3.3. Physics-Constrained Optimization 

Starting from Scano , we optimize the object poses such that the resulting scene is both physically stable under simula-tion and consistent with the canonicalized layout Scano . We leverage physical signals from a physics simulator [20] and adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy guided by the scene tree T . Specifically, we decompose the scene into local groups and perform (a) local group optimization, followed by (b) global layout optimization over the optimized groups (see Stage 3 in Fig. 2). 

3.3.1. Local Group Optimization 

With the scene tree T , we construct a set of local groups via post-order traversal. For each non-root node g ∈ T 

that has at least one child, we define a local group consist-ing of g and its direct children. We perform local optimiza-tion on each group using a physics-informed objective, such that all nodes within the group are adjusted into a physically plausible layout relative to the group root. The post-order traversal ( i.e ., processing leaves before parents) ensures that when a node appears in its parent’s group, its own group has already been optimized. Nodes without children are not treated as a local group and will be optimized in the global layout optimization. 

Formulation. We aim to estimate a physically plausible and spatially consistent layout for a local group g in the scene Scano . Each group consists of Ng child objects, where each object is represented by a 6-DoF pose. We denote the initial group layout as Pcano = {(Rcano  

> i

, tcano  

> i

)}Ng

> i=1

, where 

Rcano and tcano are rotation and translation, respectively. Starting from Pcano , we seek a set of small pose adjustments that lead to a physically stable state while preserving the original layout. We formulate this problem as a distribution-based optimization over such adjustments, where the objec-tive is to minimize a physics-informed energy function E

that measures physical feasibility and layout consistency. We adopt the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) [11, 29], a population-based stochastic optimization technique. CEM maintains a parametric Gaussian distribution over pose ad-justments and iteratively refines it toward high-quality solu-tions. Specifically, at iteration t, we model the adjustment distribution applied to the canonical group layout Pcano as a Gaussian with mean μt ∈ RNg ×6 and diagonal covariance 

Σt. We then draw K samples: 

∆P(k) 

> t

∼ N (μt, Σt), k = 1 , . . . , K, (1) and obtain candidate layouts P(k) 

> t

by applying these adjust-ments to the initial Pcano .We import all candidates into a physics simulator (Isaac Gym [20]) and perform simulation to obtain the resulting states. Based on the simulated outcomes, we compute a physics-based energy E(P(k) 

> t

) for each candidate. We se-lect an elite set Et consisting of the top ⌈ρK ⌉ lowest-energy samples, where ρ ∈ [0 , 1] is a ratio parameter. Then the distribution is updated via moment matching over the cor-responding adjustment samples: 

μt+1 ← 1

|E t|

X

> k∈E t

∆P(k) 

> t

, Σt+1 ← 1

|E t|

X

> k∈E t

(∆ P(k) 

> t

−μt+1 )2.

This process is repeated for T iterations, steering the sam-pling distribution toward physically stable and geometri-cally consistent scene layouts. Finally, we select the one with the lowest energy 

P⋆ = arg min  

> t,k

E(P(k) 

> t

)

as the final layout for the local group. See Fig. 2 Stage 3 (a). 

Energy Function. We leverage a physics engine [20] to evaluate the energy E of each candidate P(k) by placing ob-jects into the simulator using their sampled poses and run-ning forward simulation. Based on the resulting simulation states, we define the energy function E(P(k)) that consists of multiple terms: 

E = λstab Estab + λvel Evel + λpen Epen + λlayout Elayout , (2) 

where Estab and Evel measure post-simulation stability, Epen 

penalizes geometric penetration, and Elayout measures con-sistency with scene Scano . λstab , λvel , λpen , and λlayout are hyperparameters. 

Stability energy Estab measures how much objects drift from their initial placements after forward simulation. Specifically, we place each object i according to its can-didate pose (R(k) 

> i

, t(k) 

> i

) and run the simulator for L steps to obtain the post-simulation poses (R(k),L i , t(k),L i ) for each object. We then measure the deviation between the initial and final states: 

Estab = X

> i

 ∥t(k),L i − t(k) 

> i

∥ + d(R(k),L i , R(k) 

> i

), (3) 

where d(·, ·) denotes the geodesic distance between rota-tions, implemented via quaternion distance. We further in-corporate the measured velocity energy Evel at an interme-diate simulation step τ as an early indicator of instability: 

Evel = X

> i

∥vi∥, (4) 

where vi denotes the linear velocity of object i at step τ .A high velocity suggests that the object is still undergoing dynamic interactions ( e.g ., collisions) and has not yet settled to a stable state. 

Penetration energy Epen penalizes geometric overlap at both placement and settlement: 

Epen = E(k) 

> pen

+ E(k),L  

> pen

, (5) 

where E(k) 

> pen

counts pairwise convex-hull intersections at placement using the Gilbert–Johnson–Keerthi distance al-gorithm [12], and E(k),L  

> pen

counts intersections after L-step settlement. 

Layout energy Elayout enforces consistency of the settled scene with the canonicalized scene Scano :

Elayout = X

> i

 λpos ∥t(k),L i − tcano  

> i

∥ + d R(k),L i , Rcano  

> i

) . (6) 

This energy term prevents degenerate solutions in which objects are excessively dispersed to achieve physical stability at the cost of deviating from the original layout. 

3.3.2. Global Group Optimization. 

After independently optimizing all local groups, we obtain a set of optimized groups. In the global stage, we first con-sider all objects whose parents are the ground or ground-wall nodes, together with the optimized groups. Each group is treated as a single rigid unit, forming a higher-level scene graph. We perform global optimization using the same CEM-based physics-informed formulation as in the local stage, with T iterations and the same energy function E. For each candidate, all group children are included in the sim-ulator and jointly evaluated with the remaining objects. Their poses are reconstructed by composing the updated root poses with the corresponding local group poses P⋆.Finally, we apply a heuristic post-processing step to ad-just the remaining objects whose parents are wall or ceiling nodes, ensuring collision-free placement while preserving layout consistency. This yields the final optimized scene 

S. Please refer to Supp. Sec. A.2 for the pseudocode and additional details of the method. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Setup 

Baselines. We compare against four SOTA methods that take a single image as input for scene reconstruction: Dig-italCousins [9], Gen3DSR [1], SceneGen [22], and SAM3D Table 1. Comparison of physical stability and reconstruction quality. Failure rate denotes the proportion of methods that fail to reconstruct any valid scene. “—” denotes not applicable due to no GT mesh. SAM3D † indicates integrated with our Stage 1 pipelines for scene-level reconstruction (see Sec. 3.2).                                                                                                                                                         

> Method Failure Physical Metrics Geometric Metrics Rate (%) ↓Coll. Rate (%) ↓Stable Rate (%) ↑Pos. Drift (m) ↓Lin. Vel. (m/s) ↓Ang. Vel. (rad/s) ↓CD ↓F-Score ↑B-IoU ↑
> Replica  DigitalCousins [9] 0.0 37.0 47.2 0.336 1.281 1.103 0.073 0.650 0.14 Gen3DSR [1] 0.0 61.9 25.0 0.721 3.837 1.255 0.118 0.526 0.10 SceneGen [22] 0.0 76.7 11.1 1.126 3.962 8.626 0.062 0.637 0.12 SAM3D †[6] 0.0 66.7 8.3 1.116 1.385 5.787 0.004 0.954 0.43 Ours 0.0 0.0 95.8 0.094 0.152 0.557 0.007 0.919 0.37 ScanNet++  DigitalCousins [9] 33.3 20.4 45.4 0.481 1.825 2.452 0.087 0.539 0.07 Gen3DSR [1] 66.7 77.9 1.7 3.654 7.966 12.339 0.078 0.546 0.04 SceneGen [22] 50.0 80.9 5.3 10.035 29.771 27.762 0.052 0.635 0.12 SAM3D †[6] 0.0 39.1 4.6 0.948 2.096 8.121 0.015 0.816 0.19
> Ours 0.0 5.9 93.6 0.080 0.159 1.039 0.019 0.807 0.20
> Custom  DigitalCousins [9] 48.0 25.0 50.2 0.911 2.196 2.158 ———Gen3DSR [1] 40.0 68.2 7.2 2.756 6.493 9.009 ———SceneGen [22] 16.0 78.4 2.9 15.626 27.475 29.499 ———SAM3D †[6] 0.0 45.4 16.0 1.189 1.929 11.801 ———
> Ours 0.0 1.2 95.5 0.017 0.140 0.468 ———

[6]. All methods are evaluated using their publicly available code and pretrained models. Note that SAM3D is designed for single-object reconstruction. Here, we extend it by inte-grating our Stage 1 to enable scene-level reconstruction in the form of Sraw (see Sec. 3.2). We mark this modification with a † in the following tables and figures. 

Datasets. We conduct experiments on both the synthetic Replica dataset [31] and the real-world ScanNet++ dataset [43], covering diverse scenes such as meeting rooms, class-rooms, and offices. In addition, we construct a custom set of more challenging scenes (denoted as Custom ), including bedrooms, living rooms, and even cartoon-style scenes, to further evaluate the robustness to reconstruct from a casual single image. 

Metrics. We report the failure rate , i.e ., the proportion of methods that fail to reconstruct any valid scene. We fur-ther evaluate the physical plausibility of the reconstructed scenes by measuring the collision rate , stability rate , po-sition drift between the initial placement and the final set-tled state, as well as the peak linear and angular veloci-ties . For the Replica and ScanNet++ datasets, which pro-vide Ground-Truth (GT) 3D scene meshes, we additionally evaluate geometric reconstruction accuracy using Chamfer Distance (CD), F-score@0.05 (F-Score), and B-IoU, fol-lowing [6, 9, 22]. Before evaluation, we apply ICP align-ment [3] to align the reconstructed scene with GT. Please refer to Supp. Sec. B.1 for detailed metric definitions. 

4.2. Implementation Details 

All VLMs used in Stage 1 are Gemini 3 Flash. The in-stance segmentation agent calls SAM3 [4] as a tool. We use SAM3D [6] for image-to-3D. For Stage 3, we use Isaac Gym [20] as the simulator and follow real-world physics as much as possible, e.g ., setting gravity to −9.8 m /s2. For CEM optimization, we run two episodes for both local and global optimization, each consisting of T = 15 iterations. At each iteration, we sample K = 2048 candidates and select the top ρ = 0 .025 as elite candidates. We then per-form L = 60 -step simulation. For the coefficients, we set 

λstab = λvel = λlayout = 1 , λpen = 0 .5, and λpos = 6 .Please see Supp. Sec. B.2 for additional details. 

4.3. Comparison with SOTAs 

Quantitative Results. Table 1 reports quantitative results of our method and baselines. Our method achieves the best physical plausibility and reconstruction quality. On real-world ScanNet++ scenes and our custom casual im-ages, retrieval-based methods such as DigitalCousins [9] fail to produce valid reconstructions in nearly half of the cases. In contrast, both SAM3D † and our method success-fully handle all cases, benefiting from our automatic scene analysis pipeline and strong image-to-3D priors. However, SAM3D and other baselines still exhibit poor physical plau-sibility. In particular, many reconstructed objects exhibit severe interpenetration and instability, with significant post-simulation drift ( e.g ., SceneGen [22] shows drift exceeding 10 m), leading to high collision rates and large linear and angular velocities. For geometric metrics, SAM3D achieves slightly bet-ter results than our method. This is mainly be-cause our physics-constrained optimization separates inter-penetrating objects to enforce physical plausibility, intro-ducing small geometric deviations from the initial recon-struction and thus slightly increasing CD. This further re-veals that CD does not account for object-level physical validity, allowing SAM3D to obtain better scores despite severe inter-object penetration. We provide a typical case analysis in Supp. Sec. C.1. DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours        

> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 3. Comparison of simulation processes of reconstructed scenes across methods. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). Image source: Replica [31]. Canon.        

> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state

Figure 4. Effect of scene canonicalization. We visualize the simulation of the canonicalized scene ( Scano ) for the case in Fig. 3, which still remains unstable. 

Qualitative Results. Figs. 3, 6 and 7 show qualitative com-parisons of simulation processes across different methods. We visualize reconstructed scenes in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym), including the initial state, intermediate steps (20 and 40), and the final state. In some cases, severe inter-object penetration prevents full stabilization. In contrast, our method remains stable throughout the simulation. Dig-italCousins [9] models wall-attachment relations and cor-rectly keeps wall-mounted objects attached, but its retrieval-based pipeline introduces noticeable scene discrepancies, including incorrect spatial relations ( e.g . chairs placed on tables). SceneGen [22] produces inaccurate layouts, while Gen3DSR [1] improves layout quality but still suffers from failures ( e.g . misclassifying a large board-like object as a refrigerator in Fig. 3). SAM3D †, when combined with our Stage 1, achieves relatively high fidelity for individual ob-jects, but the global scene exhibits significant orientation er-

Table 2. Ablation on scene canonicalization and global-only optimization. SAM3D † denotes SAM3D with our integration.                                  

> Ablation Fail. Rate ↓Coll. Rate ↓Stable Rate ↑Pos. Drift ↓Lin. Vel. ↓Ang. Vel. ↓
> (a) SAM3D †(Sraw )0.0 45.1 12.0 1.111 1.939 10.246 (b) Canon. ( Scano )0.0 26.3 45.8 0.767 1.227 9.724 (c) Global-only 10.0 4.3 89.4 0.116 0.281 1.903
> Ours (S)0.0 2.7 94.9 0.072 0.138 0.880

rors and inter-object penetration. Moreover, it fails to infer wall-attachment relations, resulting in falling posters. Please also refer to Supp. Sec. C for additional quali-tative results (Figs. 14 to 17) and video for full simulation sequences. 

4.4. Ablation Study 

All ablations are conducted on three datasets and reported as averages; geometric metrics are reported only on Replica and ScanNet++ due to missing GT in our custom dataset. Table 3. Ablation on energy terms. We ablate different terms in Eq. (2).                                                     

> Ablation Fail. Rate ↓Coll. Rate ↓Stable Rate ↑Pos. Drift ↓Lin. Vel. ↓Ang. Vel. ↓CD ↓F-Score ↑
> w/o Estab 5.0 4.4 90.8 0.136 0.260 1.423 0.018 0.820
> w/o Evel 0.0 5.5 92.8 0.109 0.168 0.798 0.017 0.823
> w/o Epen 0.0 9.6 92.2 0.103 0.179 1.320 0.016 0.828
> w/o Elayout 0.0 2.2 91.8 0.075 0.144 0.778 0.024 0.726
> Ours 0.0 2.7 94.9 0.072 0.138 0.880 0.017 0.824 Exo -view
> Ego -view

Figure 5. VR interaction system demo. We implement a VR interaction system that enables users to naturally interact with re-constructed scenes in real time using a VR headset. 

Scene Canonicalization. Tab. 2 studies the effect of scene canonicalization in our method. The raw output of SAM3D, 

i.e . Sraw , is highly unstable in physical simulation. Our scene canonicalization step ( Scano ) significantly improves physical stability, reducing large drift and unstable cases. However, canonicalization alone is still insufficient to en-sure full physical plausibility. By further applying physics-constrained optimization, our full model achieves the best performance. Fig. 4 shows the simulation process of Scano 

for the same case in Fig. 3. It can be observed that the canonicalized scene still remains unstable and eventually collapses during simulation. 

Global-only Optimization. We ablate the effect of the lo-cal group optimization stage in our physics-constrained op-timization by removing the scene-tree guided step and in-stead optimizing all objects jointly in a single global op-timization. Tab. 2(c) reports the results. We observe that global-only optimization fails to produce valid results in ap-proximately 10% of cases. This is mainly because some scenes contain a large number of objects, making joint op-timization difficult and unstable. As a result, several cases completely fail to converge, e.g . for the top case of Fig. 6, the global-only model produces no valid output. There-fore, we report metrics on successful cases only, which may be slightly optimistic as harder cases are excluded due to failure. Even so, it still underperforms our full scene-tree-guided method. 

Energy terms. We ablate different energy terms in our en-ergy function Eq. (2). As shown in Tab. 3, removing the stability term Estab leads to failure in approximately 5% of cases where stable solutions cannot be obtained. Interest-ingly, removing the penetration term Epen yields the best geometric metrics but reduces physical stability. This is consistent with our analysis in Sec. 4.3: since the initial re-constructions often contain interpenetration, removing the collision penalty keeps objects closer to their original posi-tions, improving geometric similarity at the cost of physical plausibility. Without the layout constraint Elayout , the opti-mizer tends to separate heavily intersecting objects to im-prove stability, causing larger deviations from the original scene layout. Overall, removing any energy term degrades performance, while our full model achieves the best overall results. Please refer to Supp. Sec. C.2 for more ablative experiments. 

4.5. Real-world VR Interaction 

To demonstrate the physical plausibility of our recon-structed scenes, we implement a VR interaction system that allows users to naturally interact with the virtual objects in real time (30 FPS) using a VR headset. Hand motions are tracked and mapped to a dexterous robotic hand in Isaac Gym for physical interaction under simulation. The simula-tion is rendered back to a VR headset (Meta Quest Pro). Fig. 5 shows an example of the VR interaction process. This further highlights the potential of our system for con-tent creation, where users can naturally manipulate and re-arrange reconstructed environments. Please refer to Supp. Sec. C.3 and the video for more details and demos. 

## 5. Conclusion 

We present REST3D, a framework that transforms casual images into simulation-ready 3D digital assets by integrat-ing physical scene understanding with physics-constrained refinement, pushing beyond prior work that focuses primar-ily on visual plausibility. We introduce an agentic phys-ical scene understanding module that infers object physi-cal states and inter-object relationships as structural priors for physics-constrained optimization, enabling correction of physical errors while preserving consistency with the in-put image. Experiments show that our method outperforms SOTA approaches in both reconstruction quality and phys-ical plausibility. We further demonstrate the reconstructed scenes via VR-based human–object interaction, highlight-ing their potential for immersive applications. 

Limitations. Our method relies on the robustness of VLMs for physical scene understanding and may fail in challeng-ing cases. Currently, we focus on rigid objects and do not explicitly model deformable or non-rigid objects, which we leave for future work. 

## Acknowledgment 

The authors would like to thank Yuxuan Kuang, Yufei Wang, and Maxwell Jones for their insightful discussions. No valid result               

> No valid result
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 6. Additional comparison of simulation processes of reconstructed scenes across methods on our custom data. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). DigitalCousins [9] fails to produce any valid results. Our method remains stable while others exhibit noticeable instability. Image source: Internet. DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours               

> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 7. Additional comparison of simulation processes of reconstructed scenes across methods. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). Image source: (top) ScanNet++ [43]; (bottom) VIGA [44]. References 

[1] Andreea Ardelean, Mert ¨ Ozer, and Bernhard Egger. Generalizable 3d scene reconstruction via divide and conquer from a single view. In International Confer-ence on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2025. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 17, 23 [2] Armen Avetisyan, Tatiana Khanova, Christopher Choy, Denver Dash, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. Scenecad: Predicting object alignments and layouts in rgb-d scans. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. 2 [3] Paul J Besl and Neil D McKay. Method for regis-tration of 3-d shapes. In Sensor fusion IV: control paradigms and data structures , pages 586–606, 1992. 6[4] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris Coll-Vinent, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, Jie Lei, Tengyu Ma, Baishan Guo, Arpit Kalla, Markus Marks, Joseph Greer, Meng Wang, Peize Sun, Roman R¨ adle, Tri-antafyllos Afouras, Effrosyni Mavroudi, Katherine Xu, Tsung-Han Wu, Yu Zhou, Liliane Momeni, RISHI HAZRA, Shuangrui Ding, Sagar Vaze, Fran-cois Porcher, Feng Li, Siyuan Li, Aishwarya Ka-math, Ho Kei Cheng, Piotr Dollar, Nikhila Ravi, Kate Saenko, Pengchuan Zhang, and Christoph Feichten-hofer. SAM 3: Segment anything with concepts. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. 3, 6, 14, 15 [5] ChunTeng Chen, YiChen Hsu, YiWen Liu, WeiFang Sun, TsaiChing Ni, ChunYi Lee, Min Sun, and YuanFu Yang. Scenefoundry: Generating interactive infinite 3d worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05810 ,2026. 2 [6] Xingyu Chen, Fu-Jen Chu, Pierre Gleize, Kevin J Liang, Alexander Sax, Hao Tang, Weiyao Wang, Michelle Guo, Thibaut Hardin, Xiang Li, et al. Sam 3d: 3dfy anything in images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16624 , 2025. 1, 2, 3, 6, 16, 17 [7] Zoey Chen, Aaron Walsman, Marius Memmel, Kaichun Mo, Alex Fang, Karthikeya Vemuri, Alan Wu, Dieter Fox, and Abhishek Gupta. Urdformer: A pipeline for constructing articulated simulation envi-ronments from real-world images. Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. 2 [8] Xuxin Cheng, Jialong Li, Shiqi Yang, Ge Yang, and Xiaolong Wang. Open-television: Teleoperation with immersive active visual feedback. In 8th Annual Con-ference on Robot Learning , 2024. 19 [9] Tianyuan Dai, Josiah Wong, Yunfan Jiang, Chen Wang, Cem Gokmen, Ruohan Zhang, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Automated creation of digital cousins for robust policy learning. In Conference on Robot Learn-ing (CoRL) , 2024. 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 15, 17, 21, 23 [10] Michael Dawson-Haggerty. Trimesh [computer soft-ware]. https : / / github . com / mikedh / trimesh , 2019. 15 [11] Pieter-Tjerk De Boer, Dirk P Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y Rubinstein. A tutorial on the cross-entropy method. Annals of operations research , 134 (1):19–67, 2005. 4 [12] Elmer G Gilbert, Daniel W Johnson, and S Sathiya Keerthi. A fast procedure for computing the distance between complex objects in three-dimensional space. 

IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation , 4(2):193– 203, 1988. 5 [13] Cheng-Chun Hsu, Zhenyu Jiang, and Yuke Zhu. Ditto in the house: Building articulation models of in-door scenes through interactive perception. In In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. 2 [14] Zhening Huang, Xiaoyang Wu, Fangcheng Zhong, Hengshuang Zhao, Matthias Nießner, and Joan Lasenby. Litereality: Graphics-ready 3d scene recon-struction from rgb-d scans. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. 2 [15] Zhenyu Jiang, Cheng-Chun Hsu, and Yuke Zhu. Ditto: Building digital twins of articulated objects from inter-action. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2 [16] Long Le, Jason Xie, William Liang, Hung-Ju Wang, Yue Yang, Yecheng Jason Ma, Kyle Vedder, Arjun Kr-ishna, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Eric Eaton. Articulate-anything: Automatic modeling of articulated ob-jects via a vision-language foundation model. In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. 2 [17] Chenguo Lin and Yadong Mu. Instructscene: Instruction-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with se-mantic graph prior. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 2 [18] Guying Lin, Kemeng Huang, Michael Liu, Ruihan Gao, Hanke Chen, Lyuhao Chen, Beijia Lu, Taku Ko-mura, Yuan Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Minchen Li. Pat3d: Physics-augmented text-to-3d scene generation. In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. 2 [19] Jiayi Liu, Denys Iliash, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. SINGAPO: Single image controlled generation of articulated parts in ob-ject. International Conference on Learning Represen-tations (ICLR) , 2025. 2 [20] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin, David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, and Gavriel State. Isaac gym: High performance GPU based physics simulation for robot learning. In Pro-ceedings of the Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks ,2021. 1, 4, 5, 6, 15, 18 [21] Paul McVay, Sergio Arnaud, Ada Martin, Arjun Majumdar, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Phillip Thomas, Ruslan Partsey, Daniel Dugas, Abha Gejji, Alexander Sax, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Mikael Henaff, Ayush Jain, Ang Cao, Ishita Prasad, Mrinal Kalakr-ishnan, Michael Rabbat, Nicolas Ballas, Mido Ass-ran, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Franziska Meier. LOCATE 3d: Real-world object lo-calization via self-supervised learning in 3d. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2025. 2 [22] Yanxu Meng, Haoning Wu, Ya Zhang, and Weidi Xie. Scenegen: Single-image 3d scene generation in one feedforward pass. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2026. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 17, 21, 22 [23] Junfeng Ni, Yixin Chen, Bohan Jing, Nan Jiang, Bin Wang, Bo Dai, Puhao Li, Yixin Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Phyrecon: Physically plausible neural scene reconstruction. 2024. 1, 2, 15 [24] Junfeng Ni, Yu Liu, Ruijie Lu, Zirui Zhou, Song-Chun Zhu, Yixin Chen, and Siyuan Huang. Decomposi-tional neural scene reconstruction with generative dif-fusion prior. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 2 [25] Yinyu Nie, Xiaoguang Han, Shihui Guo, Yujian Zheng, Jian Chang, and Jian Jun Zhang. To-tal3dunderstanding: Joint layout, object pose and mesh reconstruction for indoor scenes from a single image. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. 1, 2 [26] Nicholas Pfaff, Thomas Cohn, Sergey Zakharov, Rick Cory, and Russ Tedrake. Scenesmith: Agentic genera-tion of simulation-ready indoor scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09153 , 2026. 2 [27] Stefan Popov, Pablo Bauszat, and Vittorio Ferrari. Corenet: Coherent 3d scene reconstruction from a sin-gle rgb image. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. 1, 2 [28] Yuzhe Qin, Wei Yang, Binghao Huang, Karl Van Wyk, Hao Su, Xiaolong Wang, Yu-Wei Chao, and Dieter Fox. Anyteleop: A general vision-based dexterous robot arm-hand teleoperation system. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2023. 19 [29] Reuven Y. Rubinstein. Optimization of computer sim-ulation models with rare events. European Journal of Operational Research , 99(1):89–112, 1997. 4 [30] Tobias Sautter, Jan-Niklas Dihlmann, and Hendrik Lensch. 3d-re-gen: 3d reconstruction of indoor scenes with a generative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17459 , 2025. 1, 2, 15, 22 [31] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J. Engel, Raul Mur-Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, Anton Clarkson, Mingfei Yan, Brian Budge, Yajie Yan, Xi-aqing Pan, June Yon, Yuyang Zou, Kimberly Leon, Nigel Carter, Jesus Briales, Tyler Gillingham, Elias Mueggler, Luis Pesqueira, Manolis Savva, Dhruv Ba-tra, Hauke M. Strasdat, Renzo De Nardi, Michael Goesele, Steven Lovegrove, and Richard Newcombe. The Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797 , 2019. 6, 7, 15 [32] Marcel Torne, Anthony Simeonov, Zechu Li, April Chan, Tao Chen, Abhishek Gupta, and Pulkit Agrawal. Reconciling reality through simulation: A real-to-sim-to-real approach for robust manipulation. 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. 2 [33] Shubham Tulsiani, Saurabh Gupta, David Fouhey, Alexei A. Efros, and Jitendra Malik. Factoring shape, pose, and layout from the 2d image of a 3d scene. In 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2018. 1, 2 [34] Yian Wang, Xiaowen Qiu, Jiageng Liu, Zhehuan Chen, Jiting Cai, Yufei Wang, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Zhou Xian, and Chuang Gan. Architect: Generating vivid and interactive 3d scenes with hierarchical 2d inpainting. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. 2 [35] Ziqian Wang, Yonghao He, Licheng Yang, Wei Zou, Hongxuan Ma, Liu Liu, Wei Sui, Yuxin Guo, and Hu Su. Tabletopgen: Instance-level interactive 3d table-top scene generation from text or single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01204 , 2025. 2 [36] World Labs. Marble. https : / / www . worldlabs . ai / blog / marble - world -model , 2025. 15, 17, 23 [37] Chong Xia, Kai Zhu, Zizhuo Wang, Fangfu Liu, Zhizheng Zhang, and Yueqi Duan. Simrecon: Sim-ready compositional scene reconstruction from real videos. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2026. 2 [38] Hongchi Xia, Chih-Hao Lin, Hao-Yu Hsu, Quentin Leboutet, Katelyn Gao, Michael Paulitsch, Benjamin Ummenhofer, and Shenlong Wang. Holoscene: Simu-lation-ready interactive 3d worlds from a single video. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) , 2025. 1 [39] Hongchi Xia, Entong Su, Marius Memmel, Arhan Jain, Raymond Yu, Numfor Mbiziwo-Tiapo, Ali Farhadi, Abhishek Gupta, Shenlong Wang, and Wei-Chiu Ma. Drawer: Digital reconstruction and articula-tion with environment realism. In Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 2 [40] Hongchi Xia, Xuan Li, Zhaoshuo Li, Qianli Ma, Ji-ashu Xu, Ming-Yu Liu, Yin Cui, Tsung-Yi Lin, Wei-Chiu Ma, Shenlong Wang, Shuran Song, and Fangyin Wei. Sage: Scalable agentic 3d scene generation for embodied ai. Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , 2026. 2, 15, 16, 24 [41] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 21469–21480, 2025. 2 [42] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, et al. Holodeck: Lan-guage guided generation of 3d embodied ai environ-ments. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16227–16237, 2024. 2 [43] Chandan Yeshwanth, Yueh-Cheng Liu, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Scannet++: A high-fidelity dataset of 3d indoor scenes. In International Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 12–22, 2023. 6, 10, 15, 21 [44] Shaofeng Yin, Jiaxin Ge, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Xi-uyu Li, Michael J Black, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Haiwen Feng. Vision-as-inverse-graphics agent via interleaved multimodal reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11109 , 2026. 2, 10 This supplementary material provides additional details on the method (Sec. A) and experimental setup (Sec. B), along with further experimental results and extended visu-alizations (Sec. C). 

## A. Method Details 

A.1. Scene Tree Construction 

Open-vocabulary Object List Analysis. To enable the VLM to generate a structured open-vocabulary object list O, we prompt it to detect salient objects. When multiple similar objects are present, we require additional disambiguation using location or color attributes. Besides, we manually include the floor as a canonical ground-plane reference in the object list. The full prompt is provided in our GitHub repo. 

Agentic Instance Segmentation. The agentic instance seg-mentation system consists of a segmentation agent Aseg and a verifier agent Aver . The segmentation agent Aseg takes the object list O as input and performs segmentation via tool calling, invoking a local SAM3 [4] model. Specifically, 

Aseg first describes each object in O and then obtains the corresponding mask predictions. The resulting masks are overlaid onto the input image and passed to Aver for verifi-cation. The verifier agent Aver evaluates whether the overlaid masks are correct. It iteratively interacts with Aseg , refining or rejecting incorrect masks, until either the mask is verified as correct by Aver , or the object is determined to be absent after 10 iterations. An example of the overlaid masks is shown in Fig. 8, which illustrates three objects: (a) ground, (b) dining table, and (c) plant on the dining table. The overlaid masks serve as visual inputs to the verifier agent for mask validation and also for assisting scene graph construction in the subsequent step. (b) Dining table (a) Ground (c) Plant on dining table 

Figure 8. Examples of overlaid object masks. The images are provided to the verifier agent Aver to determine mask correctness and also assist in constructing the scene tree. 

Scene Tree Construction via Spatial Reasoning. Our scene tree contains four canonical roots: ground , wall , ceil-ing , and ground-wall . We aim to assign each object its cor-responding parent under a gravity-aware perspective, and further infer the spatial relation between the object and its 

ALGORITHM 1: Physics-Constrained Optimization 

Input: Canonicalized scene Scano , scene tree T .

Output: Optimized scene S. 

> 1

G = local groups in T (non-root nodes with ≥ 1 child)  

> 2

R = {root of g ∈ G} ∪ { i ∈ T : parent( i) ∈{ground , ground-wall }} 

/* (a) Local group optimization */  

> 3

foreach g ∈ G (post-order) do  

> 4

Pcano  

> g

= {(Rcano  

> i

, tcano  

> i

)}i∈g from Scano  

> 5

P⋆g = CEM (Pcano  

> g

) // Alg. 2  

> 6

{(Rcano  

> i

, tcano  

> i

)}i∈g ← P⋆g in Scano // update group layout  

> 7

end 

/* (b) Global layout optimization */  

> 8

Pcano  

> R

= {(Rcano  

> r

, tcano  

> r

)}r∈R from Scano  

> 9

P⋆ 

> R

= CEM (Pcano  

> R

)

/* (c) Wall and ceiling object placement */  

> 10

W = {i ∈ T : parent( i) ∈ { wall , ceiling }}  

> 11

P⋆ 

> W

= PLACE WALL CEILING (W, P⋆

> R

)

// Sec. A.2  

> 12

S = P⋆ 

> R

∪ { P⋆g }g∈G ∪ P⋆ 

> W

// Optimized scene  

> 13

return S

parent ( i.e ., on, inside, hanging, or attached), as well as whether the object is movable or fixed .To this end, we prompt a VLM to perform this reasoning task, leveraging the overlaid masks from the previous step to better localize objects. The composite root, i.e . ground-wall, is introduced to handle cases where objects are simul-taneously supported by the ground and constrained by the wall, such as the “white radiator” shown in Fig. 8. The hanging and attached relations primarily apply to wall- or ceiling-mounted objects; for example, curtains are hang-ing from a rod, paintings are attached to walls, and ceiling lamps are attached to the ceiling. As described in Sec. 3.3, objects whose parents are walls or ceilings are excluded from local and global optimization. Instead, they are placed (see Sec. A.2 for details) after op-timizing the remaining scene objects and are fixed during simulation. The full prompt for this reasoning stage is provided in our GitHub repo. 

A.2. Physics-Constrained Optimization 

Alg. 1 summarizes the full physics-constrained opti-mization procedure described in Sec. 3.3. Stage (a) traverses the scene tree T in post-order and runs CEM optimization independently on each local group. Stage (b) treats each optimized group as a rigid unit and runs a second CEM pass jointly over group roots and ground- or ground-wall-supported objects. Both stages share the CEM ALGORITHM 2: CEM Optimization                                                         

> Input: Initial layout Pcano .
> Output: Best layout P⋆.
> 1Initialize (μ1,Σ1)
> 2for t= 1 , . . . , T do
> 3Sample ∆P(k)
> t∼ N (μt,Σt)for k= 1 , . . . , K
> 4P(k)
> t=Pcano ⊕∆P(k)
> t// Candidate layout
> 5Evaluate E(P(k)
> t)by forward simulation in Isaac Gym
> 6Et={k:E(P(k)
> t)is among the ⌈ρK ⌉lowest }
> 7μt+1 ←1
> |E t|
> P
> k∈E t∆P(k)
> t,
> Σt+1 ←1
> |E t|
> P
> k∈E t
>  ∆P(k)
> t−μt+1
> 2
> 8end
> 9P⋆= arg min t, k E(P(k)
> t)
> 10 return P⋆

subroutine (see Alg. 2), which evaluates each candidate by forward simulation in Isaac Gym [20] and updates the sampling Gaussian by moment matching over the elite set 

E. Final wall- and ceiling-attached objects are placed by the heuristic detailed as follows. 

Wall and Ceiling Object Placement. Objects whose scene-tree parent is wall or ceiling are initially placed at their original positions from Scano . If interpenetration with the scene is detected, we first estimate a simple room struc-ture by fitting three walls (back, left, and right) from the axis-aligned bounding box of all already settled objects, where each wall is represented as a planar mesh. Each wall/ceiling object is then assigned to its nearest fitted sur-face. After assignment, objects are translated along the nor-mal direction of their associated surface until all intersec-tions with the already optimized scene P⋆ 

> R

∪ { P⋆g }g∈G are resolved, ensuring a collision-free placement. 

## B. Experimental Setup 

B.1. Evaluation Setup 

Baselines. For retrieval-based Digital Cousins [9], each in-put scene produces three retrieved candidates. We report quantitative results by averaging over all three candidates, while visualization results are shown using the first candi-date. Note that SAM3D is designed for single-object recon-struction and thus takes an individual object as input. To adapt it to scene-level reconstruction, we first apply our Stage 1 pipeline to obtain instance-level masks. These masks are then used to independently reconstruct each ob-ject with SAM3D, and the resulting outputs are composed into a full scene, denoted as Sraw (see Sec. 3.2). We mark this modification with a † in the following tables and figures. 

Dataset. Following [23], we evaluate on 3 scenes from Replica [31] and 12 scenes from ScanNet++ [43]. In addition, the custom evaluation set consists of 25 images collected from the Internet and prior work [30, 36, 40]. The dataset covers a diverse range of scene types, including real-world images, synthesized renderings, cartoon-style images, and Gaussian-rendered scenes (from World Labs Marble [36]). Each scene contains a varying number of objects, ranging from 4 to 30. 

Metrics. For physical metrics, we compute the collision rate using trimesh [10] by detecting mesh intersections among reconstructed 3D objects. The reconstructed scene is then imported into Isaac Gym for physics-based simula-tion. An object is considered unstable if its relative trans-lation exceeds 0.1 m or its rotation exceeds 0.1 rad after 

L = 60 simulation steps. We report position drift as the displacement between the initial placement and the final set-tled state. During simulation, we further record the average peak linear and angular velocities of all objects. For geometric metrics, CD measures the bidirectional nearest-neighbor distance between reconstructed and GT point sets. F-score@0.05 (F-Score) evaluates correspon-dence accuracy under a 0.05 distance threshold. B-IoU measures the intersection-over-union between axis-aligned 3D bounding boxes of reconstructed and GT objects, rang-ing from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (perfect overlap). 

B.2. Implementation Details 

For instance segmentation, the agentic loop calls SAM3 [4] as a tool, with a maximum of 10 iterations for Aver to verify. For physics-constrained optimization, the initial Gaus-sian has zero mean and per-DoF standard devia-tions σtrans  

> 0

= (0 .05 , 0.005 , 0.05) m and σrot  

> 0

=(0 .005 , 0.05 , 0.005) rad, reflecting the prior that horizon-tal displacement and pitch require larger search ranges than vertical displacement and roll/yaw after canonicalization. For physics simulation, we use Isaac Gym [20] with the GPU PhysX backend. We set 6 position and 1 velocity it-erations, a contact offset of 0.01 m, and a maximum depen-etration velocity of 5 m/s. Simulation runs with a timestep of 1/60 s and 2 substeps, and gravity is set to −9.8 m/s 2

along the −Y direction. The ground plane uses static and dynamic friction of 1.0 with zero restitution. For object as-sets, we apply V-HACD convex decomposition with a voxel resolution of 10 5. The maximum number of convex hulls is set to 8 for near-convex furniture, 32 for organic shapes (e.g., plants and curtains), and 16 for other categories. We further set linear and angular damping to 0.3, and override center of mass and inertia. Each candidate is simulated for 

L = 60 forward steps. Velocity energy is measured at step SAM 3D SAM 3D vs. GT                    

> Ours Ours vs. GT
> CD ↓:0.004
> F↑:0.977
> B-IoU ↑:0.717
> CD ↓:0.007
> F↑:0.892
> B-IoU ↑:0.592
> GT
> Elevated view Elevated view Figure 9. A typical case illustrating the limitation of geometric metrics. SAM3D †produces physically implausible reconstructions (e.g ., floating objects and inter-penetration), which can still achieve better geometric scores after ICP alignment. In contrast, our method enforces physical plausibility, leading to worse geometric metrics despite more stable results.

τ = 15 as an early indicator of instability. 

## C. Additional Experimental Results 

This section provides additional results and analyses, in-cluding comparisons with SOTA methods (Sec. C.1), geometric metric analysis, extended visualizations, effi-ciency and API cost evaluation, extensive ablation studies (Sec. C.2), as well as discussions of failure cases and limi-tations (Sec. C.4). 

C.1. Comparison with SOTAs 

Case Study of Geometric Metrics. As analyzed in Sec. 4, our method achieves the best trade-off between physical sta-bility and fidelity to the input. However, we observe that our method performs worse than SAM3D [6] on geometric met-rics. We find that this discrepancy stems from the nature of these metrics, which do not account for physical plausibil-ity. Specifically, they compute bidirectional distances after ICP alignment between predictions and GT, without con-sidering inter-object collisions or scene-level physical con-straints. To better illustrate this issue, we visualize a typical case in Fig. 9. We show results from SAM3D (top) and our method (bottom), along with the ICP-aligned GT (second column). As shown, SAM3D produces reconstructions with severe interpenetration and floating objects (e.g ., chairs), since it does not model physical constraints. In contrast, our method separates chairs from the table and places all objects stably on the ground, resulting in physically plausible layouts. Although this leads to a lower geometric alignment score in this case, it highlights that purely geometric metrics do not fully reflect reconstruction quality in terms of physical correctness. Therefore, we include these geometric metrics only as a proof-of-concept comparison. Image SAGE Ours  

> Figure 10. Comparison with scene generation method SAGE.
> Fully agentic method SAGE [40] lacks controllability and may produce inconsistent reconstructions, while our method yields more faithful results while remaining simulation-ready.

Comparison with Scene Generation Method. We further compare our method with recent fully agentic scene genera-tion approaches such as SAGE [40] in Fig. 10. While these methods can generate simulation-ready scenes, their fully agent-driven pipelines often lack controllability, leading to heuristic, template-like results and inconsistencies when applied to real-world reconstruction, as shown in Fig. 10. In contrast, our method targets the more constrained task of single-image reconstruction, where the generated scene should faithfully match the input observation. As can be seen, our method achieves significantly more reliable and faithful reconstructions from casual images. This improvement can be attributed to our three-stage agent-assisted reconstruction and physics-constrained optimization, which enhance controllability over the gener-ation process while still producing simulation-ready scenes. 

Additional Qualitative Results. We present extensive qualitative comparisons of simulation processes across dif-ferent methods in Figs. 14 to 17. As shown in Fig. 14, on ScanNet++ scenes, retrieval-Table 4. Inference Time and API Cost Comparison. We report per-scene and per-object inference time for all methods. – means not applicable. Method min /Scene min /Obj Cost/Scene DigitalCousins [9] 32.5 2.5 $1.25 Gen3DSR [1] 39.3 2.1 –SceneGen [22] 27.1 2.1 –SAM3D † [6] 10.6 0.8 $0.22 

Ours (Total) 25.8 2.0 $0.47 Ours (Stage 1) 10.6 0.8 $0.22 Ours (Stage 2) 4.8 0.3 $0.25 Ours (Stage 3) 10.4 0.9 –

based Digital Cousins [9] often produces layouts that sig-nificantly deviate from the input scene. In contrast, Scene-Gen [22] and SAM3D † both exhibit severe interpenetration, resulting in unstable physical simulations. In contrast, our method obtains physically stable results with correct spatial layout. Fig. 15 further illustrates similar failure patterns of the baselines, which suffer from interpenetration and unsta-ble simulations, often causing objects to drift out of view during rollout, while our method remains robust. In addition, our method generalizes well to diverse input styles. As shown in Fig. 16, we can directly handle Gaussian-rendered scenes from World Labs Mar-ble [36], producing stable and physically plausible recon-structions, whereas baselines such as Digital Cousins [9] and Gen3DSR [1] fail to produce valid outputs. Fig. 17 fur-ther demonstrates robustness on synthetic and cartoon-style inputs, respectively, where our method consistently main-tains physically valid layouts, while competing approaches either collapse or produce unstable reconstructions. Please also refer to the supplementary video and project website for better visualization of the simulation results. 

Inference Time and API Cost. We compare inference time on an NVIDIA TITAN RTX and API cost across methods in Tab. 4. Among baselines, Gen3DSR [1] is the most time-consuming. SAM3D † leverages our Stage 1 pipeline for scene-level reconstruction, and thus shares the same run-time and cost as our Stage 1. For completeness, we report the runtime and cost of each stage in our pipeline. In total, our method requires 25.8 minutes per scene, making it com-parable to or faster than existing baselines. Note that the re-ported runtime for both DigitalCousins [9] and our method includes API calls as well as the waiting time incurred by API requests. In terms of cost, following the official implementation of DigitalCousins [9], GPT-4o is used, which requires $1.25 per scene. Our method costs $0.47 per scene using Gemini 3 Flash. 

Table 5. Effect of scene tree on SAM3D † and canonicalized scenes. We evaluate SAM3D † Sraw and canonicalized scenes Scano 

under physics simulation with and without our scene tree T .Method Coll. Rate ↓ Stable Rate ↑ Pos. Drift ↓ Lin. Vel. ↓ Ang. Vel. ↓                               

> SAM3D †(Sraw )45.1 12.0 1.111 1.939 10.246 SAM3D †(Sraw ) + T45.1 36.6 0.714 1.195 6.916 Canon. ( Scano )26.3 45.8 0.767 1.227 9.724 Canon. ( Scano ) + T26.3 70.6 0.334 0.488 2.902
> Ours ( S)2.7 94.9 0.072 0.138 0.880

C.2. Ablation Study 

Scene Canonicalization. Fig. 11 shows additional visual comparisons before and after scene canonicalization. We observe that canonicalization (Canon. Scano ) significantly reduces large pose and orientation errors in the original SAM3D predictions. However, the resulting scenes are still physically unstable due to heavy object intersections. 

SAM3D with Scene Tree. Since SAM3D † lacks explicit spatial reasoning, its reconstructed scenes Sraw often con-tain unsupported objects ( e.g ., wall-mounted or ceiling-hanging objects) that fall during simulation. To isolate whether this failure is solely caused by such objects, we further evaluate SAM3D † combined with our inferred scene tree T during physics simulation. As shown in Tab. 5, intro-ducing the scene tree leads to a noticeable improvement in stability. However, due to remaining interpenetrations in the reconstructed geometry, the system is still highly unstable. We further apply the same scene tree T to the canonicalized scene Scano , which yields additional but limited improve-ments. Overall, these results indicate that the instability of SAM3D is not only caused by wall- or ceiling-attached objects, and that simple scene canonicalization cannot fully resolve geometric and physical inconsistencies. In contrast, our physics-constrained optimization significantly improves stability across all metrics. 

CEM elite fraction. Tab. 6 ablates the elite fraction ρ,which controls the proportion of top-scoring samples used to update the CEM distribution at each iteration. We ob-serve that very small values of ρ can lead to insufficiently stable updates due to limited elite diversity, while overly large values reduce the selectivity of the optimization pro-cess. Overall, ρ = 0 .025 provides a better balance be-tween exploration and exploitation, resulting in more sta-ble and physically consistent solutions. We therefore adopt 

ρ=0 .025 as the default setting. 

C.3. Real-world VR Interaction 

System overview. We build a VR interaction system that connects a reconstructed 3D scene with a physics-based Ours SAM3D Canon.               

> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> SAM3D Canon.  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 11. Effect of scene canonicalization. We visualize the simulation of SAM3D reconstructed scene ( Sraw ), the canonicalized scene (Canon. Scano ), which still remains unstable. Meta   

> Quest Pro
> Exo -view in Real World Exo -view in VR
> Ego -view in VR Inspire
> Hand

Figure 12. VR interaction setup and demo. We build our VR-based interaction system using a Meta Quest Pro headset. User hand motions captured via real-time hand tracking are mapped to a simulated Inspire hand in Isaac Gym, enabling physically grounded interaction with reconstructed 3D scenes. 

simulator, i.e . Isaac Gym [20], enabling users to manipulate objects in real time using a VR headset, as shown in Fig. 12. We formulate VR interaction as a physics-based control problem, where user hand motions are continuously mapped to two simulated dexterous Inspire Hands that interact with the scene under rigid-body dynamics. The system runs in a real-time closed loop (30 FPS), where hand tracking data from a Meta Quest Pro headset is streamed to the physics simulator and the updated scene state is rendered back to the user, enabling physically No valid result        

> No valid result
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 13. A typical limitation case analysis. We show a qualitative comparison of simulation results with prior methods. Due to open-vocabulary detection failure, i.e . missing a wall-mounted shelf (purple dashed circle), our reconstruction may deviate from the input image. In addition, walls are not explicitly modeled during optimization, causing some wall-supported objects such as the two pillows on a bench (red dashed circle) to be relocated to the ground for physical stability. Despite these issues, our method still significantly outperforms prior approaches. Table 6. Ablation on CEM elite fraction. We study the effect of different elite fraction ρ during CEM optimization.                                  

> Elite Frac ρStable Rate ↑Pos. Drift ↓Lin. Vel. ↓Ang. Vel. ↓
> 0.01 92.0 0.081 0.204 1.047
> 0.025 (Ours) 94.9 0.072 0.138 0.880
> 0.05 92.9 0.107 0.199 0.911 0.1 91.2 0.060 0.192 1.087 0.2 90.2 0.109 0.231 1.223 0.5 83.0 0.124 0.276 1.535

consistent interaction. Please refer to our supplementary video and project website for more VR demonstrations. 

Hand tracking and control. Following Open-TeleVision [8], we adopt a two-level control scheme for dexter-ous hand manipulation. Wrist motion is controlled via proportional–derivative (PD) force–torque actuation for physically grounded interaction. Finger joints are obtained using an inverse kinematics-based retargeting method [28], which maps tracked fingertip positions to feasible joint con-figurations. At each simulation step, we compute the position and orientation error between the target wrist pose from VR tracking and the current Isaac wrist state, and apply PD control to generate force and torque commands on the base link. We use a position gain of 200 N /m with a force clamp of 35 N , and an orientation gain of 10 Nm /rad with a torque clamp of 5 Nm . In addition, a soft-grip spring is activated when at least two finger links are within 0.12 m 

of an object, with stiffness 60 N /m and damping 8 N ·s/m.

Physics simulator parameters. We use a simulation timestep of 1/30 s with 4 substeps under GPU PhysX. Object friction is set to 2.0 for both static and dynamic bodies; combined with hand-link friction 2.0 under PhysX multiply mode, this yields an effective contact friction of approximately 4.0, sufficient for stable grasping. Rolling and torsional friction are set to 0.1. Wall-attached objects use contact and rest offsets of 0.01 m and 0.005 m , while dynamic objects use 0.005 m and 0.001 m . Linear and angular damping are set to 8 and 3, respectively. Collision geometry is approximated using V-HACD decomposition with a voxel resolution of 10 6 and up to 32 convex hulls per object. 

Object mass assignment. To enable physically realistic grasping, we assign each object a mass based on its seman-tic category inferred from the scene tree T . The scene rep-resentation provides an object list with category names and attributes, which we use to group objects into three classes: 

heavy (sofas, desks, beds, cabinets, etc .) with mass clamped to [60 , 200] kg ; medium (chairs, ottomans, lamps, TVs, etc.) with mass in [3 , 7] kg ; and light (cups, books, vases, remote controls, etc.) with mass in [2 .5, 4] kg . Inertia tensors are scaled proportionally when the natural V-HACD mass is clamped to the category range. This semantic assignment can also be implemented using a VLM that directly infers object properties from the scene. 

C.4. Limitations and Future Directions 

Despite significantly improving the physical stability of scene reconstruction, real-world environments remain highly complex, with diverse geometries and open-vocabulary challenges, which expose the limitations of cur-rent VLMs in visual reasoning. As shown in Fig. 13, miss-ing detections, such as a shelf mounted on the wall (high-lighted by purple dashed circle), may cause the inferred lay-out to deviate from the original image. Nevertheless, our physics-constrained optimization is still able to find plau-sible and stable placements for these densely arranged ob-jects. Our current framework mainly focuses on reconstruct-ing rigid objects in scenes. However, real-world environ-ments contain a large variety of non-rigid objects, includ-ing a significant class of articulated objects. Extending the framework to handle non-rigid and articulated objects is an important direction toward enabling more general and re-alistic scene reconstruction in complex real-world environ-ments, with potential applications in downstream robotics and embodied AI tasks. Another limitation is that we do not explicitly model walls as supporting structures during the physics-constrained optimization. As a result, objects that rely on wall support may not preserve their original layouts after optimization. For instance, in Fig. 13 (highlighted by red dashed circle), two pillows placed on a bench near the win-dow are relocated to the ground, since the wall is not ex-plicitly represented as a support constraint in the optimiza-tion process. This optimized solution yields a lower energy state under physical constraints, with the object orientations remaining consistent with the original scene, and is there-fore considered more stable. Nevertheless, our method still significantly outperforms existing approaches in terms of physical plausibility and stability. There also remain many promising future directions to explore, including incorpo-rating explicit scene structure priors, such as walls and sup-port surfaces, into the optimization process to better pre-serve global layout consistency while maintaining physical plausibility. No valid result               

> No valid result
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 14. Additional qualitative comparison of simulation processes. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). DigitalCousins [9] retrieves objects that significantly deviate from the input scene with incorrect spatial layout. SceneGen [22] and SAM3D † suffer from severe interpenetration, leading to unstable simulations. Image source: ScanNet++ [43]. DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours               

> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 15. Additional qualitative comparison of simulation processes. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). SceneGen [22] and SAM3D † suffer from severe interpenetration, leading to unstable simulations. Image source: 3D-RE-GEN [30]. No valid result               

> No valid result
> No valid result
> No valid result
> No valid result
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 16. Additional qualitative comparison of simulation processes. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). Our method supports Gaussian-rendered scenes from World Labs Marble [36] as input and produces the most stable results, while DigitalCousins [9] and Gen3DSR [1] fail to yield valid outputs. Image source: World Labs Marble [36]. No valid result               

> No valid result
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image
> DigitalCousins Gen3DSR SceneGen SAM3D  Ours
> Initial state 20 steps 40 steps Final state Image

Figure 17. Additional qualitative comparison of simulation processes. We visualize the simulation process of scenes reconstructed by different methods in a physics simulator (Isaac Gym). Our method remains robust on synthetic input, while other methods either fail to produce valid results or exhibit severe instability. Image source: (top) SAGE [40]; (bottom) Internet.