Title: Channel-Level Relation to Attentive Aggregation with Neighborhood-Homogeneity Constraint for Point Cloud Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02357v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:46:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Channel-Level Relation to Attentive Aggregation with Neighborhood-Homogeneity Constraint for Point Cloud Analysis 

1st Jiaqi Shi 1, 2 nd Jin Xiao* 1, 3 rd Xiaoguang Hu 1, 4 th Wenxuan Ji 1,5th Zichong Jia 1, 6 th Zifan Long 1, 7 th Tianyou Chen 11School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China Emails: shijiaqi@buaa.edu.cn, xiaojin@buaa.edu.cn, xiaoguang@buaa.edu.cn, jiwenxuan@buaa.edu.cn, longzifan@buaa.edu.cn, chentianyou@buaa.edu.cn. 

Abstract —In 3D point cloud understanding, the core challenge lies in accurately capturing discriminative features within com-plex neighborhoods, which directly affects the execution precision of downstream tasks such as embodied AI and autonomous driv-ing. Existing methods explore feature correlation discrimination but are limited to point-level spatial distribution or channel re-sponses, enabling only coarse-grained level evaluation. For mod-ern multi-scale point cloud networks, such coarse-grained metrics inevitably incur significant information loss in deeper layers. To address this issue, we propose a novel network equipped with a channel-level metric-based enhancement mechanism, termed the PointCRA network. Our core idea is to introduce temporal trend variation as a new evaluation dimension to avoid the information loss caused by weight dimension collapse in existing spatial and channel attention mechanisms. On this basis, we construct a multi-level calibration framework guided by neighborhood homogeneity for weight calibration, and design a dedicated loss function to enhance channel discriminability. The module effec-tively leverages the intrinsic feature priors of deep networks to adaptively correct the feature aggregation process, offering strong interpretability with low parameter overhead. Furthermore, our proposed method exhibits strong transferability, interpretability, and parameter efficiency. We validate the proposed method effectiveness on diverse datasets and benchmark models, and further demonstrate its rationality through extensive analytical experiments. Our PointCRA achieves 77.5% mIoU on the S3DIS dataset, 90.4% OA on the ScanObjectNN dataset, and 87.4% instance mIoU on the ShapeNetPart dataset. The code and pretrained weights are publicly available on GitHub: 

Index Terms —Point Cloud, Deep Learning, Neighborhood Aggregation, Attention. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# POINT clouds are a key representation of real-world 3D geometry, essential for perception tasks like embodied AI and autonomous driving. Their unstructured and unordered nature makes the accurate extraction of discriminative features from local neighborhoods a core challenge [1]–[3]. The pioneering work PointNet [4] first successfully intro-duced deep learning to point cloud analysis by independently mapping the coordinates of each point into a feature vector, thereby establishing the architectural foundation for point cloud deep learning. Subsequent researches [5]–[8] have pri-marily followed the path of architectural deepening, extending this framework by stacking multiple neighborhood aggregation modules and increasing network depth to enhance the model’s representational capacity in complex scenes. However, the performance of such methods is constrained by their core op-erational mechanism, specifically the inherent randomness of the group-sampling method employed in neighborhood aggre-gation. Mainstream group-sampling algorithms (e.g., based on ball query or k-nearest neighbors) rely solely on simple spatial heuristics (such as a fixed radius or a predefined number of points). This often results in constructed neighborhoods con-taining irrelevant and noisy point features, which subsequently interfere with the aggregation process. [9]–[11] has demon-strated that the generalization ability of features extracted by deep learning is negatively correlated with their Gaussian complexity. Therefore, noise interference during neighborhood aggregation will degrade the generalization capability of the network. To address this issue, a line of research has shifted focus from mere architectural scaling to the refinement of the aggre-gation process itself. These methods aim to improve aggrega-tion precision by explicitly measuring point-wise correlations within a neighborhood to distinguish informative points from distractors. Representative approaches include modeling inter-point feature correlations via attention mechanisms [12]– [15], refining point-to-center affinity with additional spatial positional encoding [16]–[18], or generating discriminative weights by computing channel-wise responses [19], [20]. These methods perform weighted computation based on the aggregated neighborhood feature matrices, thereby enhancing the representational capacity of the network. However, the metric basis of these methods is confined to a single dimension of the 2D neighborhood feature matrix (rows: neighboring points, columns: channels), thereby enabling only point-level metric weights. This point-level metric paradigm suffers from two interrelated critical limitations: (i) Coarse Metric Granularity. These methods treat each neighboring point as an indivisible whole, using its full-dimensional feature vector as the fundamental unit for affinity computation. In deep networks, however, high-level points are often super-points aggregated from multiple lower-level points, inherently encoding rich substructure information. Compressing such a compositionally complex entity into a single feature vector and subsequently computing its holistic similarity to the refer-ence point inevitably averages out substructure semantics and channel-wise discriminative responses. This leads to the loss of fine-grained information and ultimately results in ambiguity during neighborhood aggregation. 

> arXiv:2605.02357v1 [cs.CV] 4 May 2026 2

(ii) Rigid metric perspective. The weight computation in these methods relies entirely on metric references based on query points or global means, making the enhancement effect highly sensitive to the representativeness of such references. However, the representativeness of these metric references varies significantly across different geometric contexts: in homogeneous regions (e.g., walls, tabletops) versus heteroge-neous regions (e.g., edges, corners), the representativeness of the neighborhood center cannot be uniformly treated, nor can the discriminative feature channels be consistently identified. Under such circumstances, continuing to use these metric ref-erences as the sole anchors for weight assignment introduces notable evaluation bias, leading to structural distortions in aggregation results within complex regions. Therefore, we propose a point cloud analysis network that performs adaptive aggregation based on channel-level metrics, termed PointCRA, which transcends the metric granularity limitations of existing methods by introducing a new eval-uation dimension. First, we refine the fundamental unit of affinity computation from the point level to the channel level. Specifically, we introduce a channel-level similarity evaluation method based on feature transformation trend dis-tance, enabling fine-grained characterization of each chan-nel across neighboring points. Furthermore, we construct a channel-point-neighborhood three-level framework for pro-gressive metric and reverse calibration. The framework first performs stepwise aggregation to generate weights and neigh-borhood homogeneity distributions at all three levels. It then leverages the homogeneity distribution as a constraint to reverse-calibrate the point-level and channel-level weights in a top-down manner. Finally, we introduce a specially designed loss function to calibrate the partitioning of neighborhood weights, thereby avoiding weight oversaturation and enhancing feature discriminability. Based on DeLAv1 as the baseline, we integrate the afore-mentioned methods to design PointCRA, achieving adaptive neighborhood aggregation guided by neighborhood distribu-tion homogeneity constraints. Furthermore, we transplant our proposed method to multiple different baseline variants and validate its effectiveness. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can serve as a general-purpose enhancement approach to improve the feature representation capability of point cloud analysis networks. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose a channel-level affinity metric that captures the correlation strength between neighboring points at the feature channel level, overcoming the limitation of existing methods that operate at the point level, and incorporate lightweight improvements.  

> •

We construct a three-level weighting framework con-strained by neighborhood homogeneity, which enables adaptive weight allocation through channel-to-point-to-neighborhood progressive metric and top-down reverse calibration.  

> •

we integrate the aforementioned algorithmic designs to propose the PointCRA network, along with a dedi-cated loss function to enhance weight discriminability. Equipped with these components, PointCRA achieves state-of-the-art performance.  

> •

We transfer our proposed method to different baseline models and datasets for evaluation, validating its effec-tiveness and transferability, and conduct comprehensive analytical experiments to verify its rationality. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Point Cloud Analysis 

Due to the unordered nature of point clouds, traditional image processing methods cannot be directly applied. Point-Net [4] first introduced a symmetric function to aggregate global features but was limited in capturing fine-grained local structures due to its architecture. To address this, PointNet++ [21] proposed the Set Abstraction module and established a hierarchical feature learning paradigm, laying the foundation for modern point cloud analysis networks. In recent years, driven by the increasing demand for under-standing complex scenes, numerous works have focused on modernizing this classic PointNet++ architecture to enhance its representation capacity. On one hand, some works [5]–[8], [22] stack multiple neigh-bor aggregation modules within the same layer, constructing deeper and wider network structures to improve the abstraction capability for complex geometric patterns. On the other hand, other works [8], [22]–[25] aim to optimize the internal neigh-bor relationship modeling by introducing finer spatial structure encoding or more advanced feature aggregation mechanisms, thereby enhancing the discriminability of local features while preserving the hierarchical structure. Although these modernized approaches have significantly improved performance, their core neighbor aggregation strat-egy remains largely similar to that of PointNet++: updat-ing a central point feature by aggregating features from its neighboring points. When confronting complex scenes, this paradigm still faces two critical challenges: interference from irrelevant points and sub-structure confusion. When a local neighborhood contains points from different objects or different semantic parts, simple aggregation introduces noisy information, leading to feature ambiguity and limiting the model’s ability to perceive fine-grained local geometry. To address these issues, we propose a feature enhancement method tailored for modern multi-scale point cloud analysis networks, which calibrates the consistency of neighborhood features by aggregating outputs from multiple aggregation modules, thereby fully unleashing the potential of existing architectures and enhancing feature representation capability in complex scenarios. 

B. Attentive Neighborhood Aggregation 

To address the issue of irrelevant point interference in mainstream neighborhood aggregation methods that rely on 3D coordinates as the neighborhood relation vector, numerous subsequent works have proposed weighted aggregation strate-gies. For instance, [9] evaluates the importance of neighboring points based on feature semantic similarity. [16], [18] incorpo-rates additional spatial structure encoding to refine similarity 3

measurement in metric space. [24]–[27] adaptively adjusts the weights of neighboring points through learnable kernel points. [8], [17] leverage key points as references for feature mea-surement. [12]–[14], [28]–[30] employ attention mechanisms to compute weight distribution within the neighborhood. However, these methods operate at the point-wise weight measurement. Whether based on spatial structure similarity or feature-based attention computation, they overlook two critical aspects: channel-wise sub-structure analysis, where different feature channels may correspond to distinct local geometric patterns, and the influence of the overall neighborhood distri-bution on individual point weight assignment, meaning that the weight of a neighboring point should adapt to its surrounding distribution context. To address these limitations, we propose a channel-wise weight calibration method for neighbor aggregation. Our ap-proach dynamically adjusts the contribution of neighboring points at the channel granularity while fully considering the homogeneity of the overall neighborhood distribution, en-abling adaptive weight allocation. This design enables flexible capture of structural features across different regions, effec-tively alleviating the issues of irrelevant point interference and sub-structure confusion. This leads to substantially improved point cloud analysis performance, particularly in complex scenarios. 

C. Channel Attentive 

To capture fine-grained feature information, channel atten-tion mechanisms have gained extensive attention in computer vision. [31] computes the average response weight of each channel to identify critical response channels, enhancing the representation accuracy of image features. Building upon this, [32] introduces higher-order statistical information or frequency-domain features to enrich the expressiveness of channel descriptors, further improving network performance. [33] further compares channel differences for each pixel pair, refining the granularity of channel weight computation and identifying channels with discriminative gaps based on an attention mechanism. [19], [20], [34] leverage the multi-head channel attention mechanism to refine neighbor aggregation weights from both spatial and semantic dimensions, and [19]facilitates effective context propagation through cross-attention. However, the aforementioned channel attention mechanisms predominantly consider the response weight of individual channels from the perspective of global distribution, over-looking the differences in local structures among individual points. Although some studies [19], [33] have attempted to address this limitation, their computations fundamentally rely on overall response differences along the channel dimension, measuring channel-wise discriminative weights for point-pair features rather than the local similarity-based correlations of substructures within a point pair. Consequently, these meth-ods essentially perform point-level weight computation, and their approach of deriving channel discriminative weights from single-layer channel numerical differences is prone to confusion caused by global feature distribution in high-level network layers. Furthermore, their reliance on implicit mod-eling approaches such as attention mechanisms and MLPs introduces substantial parameter and computational overhead while reducing model interpretability. To address the above limitations, we move beyond se-lecting discriminative channels based on global channel dis-tribution and instead introduce sub-structure correlations to refine the channel-wise relevance weights for each point during neighborhood aggregation. Within each neighborhood, we evaluate and select representative features from multiple dimensions. Compared to globally shared channel weights, this neighborhood-adaptive approach offers greater flexibility. Notably, unlike implicit weight computation methods based on attention mechanisms, our method exhibits clearer physical meaning and stronger interpretability, enabling the use of more efficient metric functions with low computational overhead. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Point Cloud Analysis Pipeline 

This chapter provides a brief introduction to existing point cloud analysis networks from two perspectives the overall framework and the single layer structure and analyzes the problems existing in their neighborhood aggregation process. We first introduce the overall framework commonly adopted by current point cloud analysis networks. These networks employ a hierarchical architecture designed to extract fea-tures from local to global scales through multiple rounds of neighborhood aggregation at different resolutions. This paradigm was first pioneered by PointNet++ [21] and has been extensively extended and improved by subsequent works. The PointNet++-style framework constructs feature pyramids primarily through its proposed Set Abstraction (SA) modules. This process can be formulated as follows: 

f ′ 

> i

= N A {pi, f i, N ′ 

> i

} (1) 

N A {pi, f i, N ′ 

> i

} = R {M { fi,j , p i − pi,j } | j ∈ N ′ 

> i

} (2) where NA denotes neighborhood aggregation, pi and fi

represent the coordinates and features of each point, pij and 

fij represent the coordinates and features of neighboring points, and Ni denotes the neighborhood of point pi. The SA module builds feature pyramids at multiple resolutions to capture fine details. Thus, the neighborhood Ni for a downsampled point pi ∈ N ′ is gathered from the original point cloud N :

N ′ 

> i

= G { pi, p j } , p i ∈ N ′, p j ∈ N (3) The SA module introduced above serves as the main com-ponent of a given network layer. To further enhance represen-tation capacity, multiple neighborhood aggregation modules are typically stacked sequentially after the SA module within this single layer to strengthen non-linear feature expression. This process can be formulated as follows: 

f l+1  

> i

= EM BED (N A pli, f li , Ni ) (4) where l denotes the index of stacked modules, N i repre-sents the neighborhood set sampled by a Grouper from the 4

current-layer point cloud centered at pi without additional downsampling, and EMBED (·) denotes an additional encoding layer (e.g., MLP). This architecture allows the initial features 

f pi computed by the SA module to propagate within its local neighborhood, thereby expanding the receptive field. Moreover, the stacking of multiple modules and the intro-duction of encoding layers enhance the network’s non-linear representation capacity, enabling it to handle more complex point cloud analysis tasks, such as semantic segmentation of large-scale or densely populated areas. 

B. Limitations of Existing Methods 

The point cloud analysis network architecture presented in Section III-A suffers from inherent deficiencies in its measure-ment mechanism. This section analyzes these problems and examines the limitations of current improvement approaches. We first analyze the neighborhood aggregation module represented by the SA module from the perspectives of point coordinates and point features. In Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, the input to the SA module is a set of neighboring points collected by a Grouper, where each point consists of coordinates and features: coordinates describe geometric relationships while features represent semantic information. Since the SA module applies the same multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for feature transformation (i.e., weight sharing) across all neighboring points and employs batch normalization for regularization, each feature channel encodes identical semantic or geometric patterns across different points. However, this computation process suffers from three main problems. (i) The sampling strategy (typically KNN or Ball Query) is based solely on geometric distance constraints, which inevitably introduces irrelevant points or noise into the sampled neighborhood set. Relying only on 3D Euclidean distance metrics makes it difficult to effectively distinguish these nearby interfering noises. (ii) The network employs a pyramid structure to construct multi-resolution feature maps for capturing local details. In high-level layers, each point feature actually represents a super-point composed of multiple stacked sub-structures. At this stage, if similarity between super-points is still measured at the point level, it leads to measurement confusion at the sub-structure level. (iii) Due to the use of shared MLP and the inability of 3D coordinates to measure semantic distance, max pooling is commonly adopted as the aggregation function to ensure rotation invariance and feature sensitivity. However, this process inevitably introduces significant information loss. Therefore, multi-layer point cloud analysis networks require fine-grained measurement of sub-structure relationships between neighboring points, and more precise weight allocation to improve the accuracy of neigh-borhood aggregation. To address these issues, existing research has primarily pursued optimization in two directions. One direction includes point cloud denoising networks [9], [16], [17], [26], which start from point-wise relationship measurement and refine point-pair descriptions by introducing spatial relation vectors, learnable kernel points, or feature attention mechanisms as supplements to 3D Euclidean coordinates, thereby suppressing noise interference in neighborhood aggregation. The other direction involves channel attention mechanisms [19], [20], [31], [32], which approach optimization from channel weight allocation and identify sensitive feature channels based on global statistical information of each channel, thereby enhanc-ing the network’s discriminative capacity for similar structures. The computation process of these methods is illustrated in Fig. 1a. 

> (a) Existing point-level optimization strategies.
> (b) Proposed channel-level optimization strategies.

Fig. 1: Illustration of different optimization strategies in neighbor-hood aggregation for point clouds, where K denotes the number of points in the neighborhood, C denotes the feature dimension and L denotes the number of neighborhood aggregation modules.(a) Illustration of existing point-level optimization strategies. The upper part (Point weight) computes point-wise weights based on the rows of the neighborhood feature matrix, while the lower part (Channel weight) computes channel discriminability based on the columns of the neighborhood matrix. (b) Our proposed method computes the correlation of each element in the neighborhood matrix based on feature variation trends. 

The above methods have refined relationship measurement in neighborhood aggregation to some extent: the former opti-mizes the row dimension of the SA input matrix (i.e., point-wise relationships), while the latter optimizes the column dimension (i.e., channel weights). However, the computation of the former relies on holistic measurement of each point’s overall spatial and semantic features, causing all feature channels to share a single point-level weight, which leads to structural confusion in high-level layers. The latter, in contrast, depends on the overall neighborhood response on a single channel, causing all neighboring points to share the same channel weight, which leads to confusion in point-wise differences. In other words, existing methods remain confined to single-dimension optimization at either the spatial weight or the channel weight, failing to achieve joint modeling of intra-point sub-structures and channel sub-spaces. Consequently, when facing complex scenes where super-points consist of multiple sub-structures, these methods struggle to accurately 5

capture fine-grained geometric and semantic correlations, leav-ing noise interference and measurement confusion fundamen-tally unresolved. Based on the above analysis, a neighborhood aggregation optimization method that jointly captures point-wise relation-ships and channel dimensions at the sub-structure level holds promise for achieving more accurate feature propagation and noise suppression. The detailed process is presented below: 

f ′ 

> i

= Cd=1 



Mean 

> j∈N i

(wijd · cjd )



(5) where cjd denotes the feature value of neighboring point j

in channel d, wijd is the calibration weight for point j with respect to point i in channel d, and Mean( ·) denotes mean pooling. Through this operation, each channel independently performs weight calibration, enabling fine-grained channel-wise neighborhood aggregation. IV. M ETHOD 

A. Sequential Module Channel-wise Distance Computation 

In Sec. III-B, we pointed out that existing neighborhood aggregation optimization methods address spatial relationships and channel discrimination separately, but fail to achieve joint modeling of these two dimensions. To address this issue, this paper introduces the output trends of sequential modules as a new measurement basis and proposes a channel-wise distance computation method based on layer-wise feature transformation trends. Specifically, building upon the sequential module structure in existing networks, this paper introduces a temporal dimen-sion and concatenates the feature response values of each point across channels according to the output sequence, serving as the foundation for similarity measurement. As discussed in Sec. III-A, due to the shared weights in network modules, each feature channel encodes consistent semantic meaning, and the stacking of multiple aggregation modules facilitates the propagation of feature information within local neighborhoods and the enhancement of key homogeneous features. Therefore, similar structures exhibit similar feature response patterns. By comparing the consistency of feature transformation trends be-tween neighboring point pairs across channels, their structural similarity can be evaluated. Compared to comparing output values from single-layer networks, trend consistency better avoids the extreme value effects caused by noise interference. We achieve this measurement by calculating the cosine angle of the transformation vectors between the outputs of each sequential module. For a center point pi and its neighboring point pj , consider the outputs of L sequential modules in the network. Let f (l)

> i,d

denote the feature value of point pi in channel d at the output of the l-th module, where l = 1, 2, ..., L . To capture the evolution pattern of features in deep networks, we define the feature transformation vector of point pi in channel d from layer l to layer l + 1 as: 

t(l) 

> i,d

= f (l+1)  

> i,d

− f (l) 

> i,d

, l = 1 , 2, ..., L − 1 (6) The vector t(l) 

> i,d

reflects the direction and magnitude of feature changes between adjacent modules. However, due to the feature propagation within the neighborhood inherent to the LA module, adjacent features tend to converge. To enhance feature discriminability, we perform the following operation: 

∆(l) 

> i,d

= t(l) 

> i,d

−

> K

X

> j=1

t(l)

> j,d

K , l = 1 , 2, . . . , L − 1 (7) where t(l) 

> j,d

denotes the trend value of a neighboring point, and K is the number of neighboring points. Equation (7) performs neighborhood normalization on each vector t(l)

> i,d

. We finally use the vector ∆(l) 

> i,d

for feature trend comparison. For points pi and pj , the directional consistency of their l-th transformation in channel d can be measured by the cosine similarity of their transformation vectors: 

cos θ(l) 

> ij,d

= ∆(l) 

> i,d

· ∆(l)

> j,d

|∆(l)

> i,d

|| ∆(l)

> j,d

| (8) To comprehensively evaluate the trend consistency through-out the feature evolution process, we accumulate the cosine values over L − 1 transformations to obtain the final trend similarity between the two points in channel d:

Sij,d =

> L−1

X

> l=1

cos θ(l)

> ij,d

(L − 1) (9) where Sij,d denotes the trend similarity between center point pi and neighboring point pj in channel d. A larger 

Sij,d indicates higher consistency in feature evolution trends between the two points, reflecting greater similarity in their local geometric substructures. The proposed channel-wise trend similarity achieves fine-grained measurement at the sub-structure level by jointly modeling point-wise relationships and channel-wise correla-tions, breaking through the limitation of single-dimension optimization. Meanwhile, the strategy of layer-wise accumula-tion and global comparison exhibits stronger noise robustness compared to single-layer network outputs. Furthermore, un-like existing methods that rely on attention mechanisms or linear projection layers, our approach offers clearer physical significance: consistent transformation trends indicate that corresponding points evolve along similar paths in deep net-works, while also avoiding additional parameter computational overhead. At this point, the computed trend similarity Sij,d can pre-liminarily reflect the correlation degree between two channels based on feature evolution trends. It is worth noting that we do not apply normalization operations such as Softmax to these weights, as we believe such normalization at the channel-wise granularity would weaken fine-grained feature discrimination capabilities. To reduce computational overhead, we introduce a channel grouping strategy. Considering that adjacent channels often encode correlated geometric and semantic information, we group channels into groups of G = 4 and let each group 6

share a single similarity value. The initial channel-wise weight 

P c ij,d is then defined as: 

P c ij,d = Sij,g , with g =

 dG



, g ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , ⌈C/G ⌉} 

(10) where g denotes the channel group index. This grouping strategy ensures that every G adjacent channels share the same trend similarity value Sij,g , thereby reducing computational overhead while preserving statistical stability (detailed exper-imental validation in Sec. V-D). However, the above initial weights P c ij,d constitute asingle-perspective metric, relying only on feature evolution trends without considering neighborhood distribution. As an-alyzed in the Introduction, such a metric cannot adaptively adjust weights based on neighborhood heterogeneity, making it vulnerable to noise and geometrically abrupt regions. To address this, we introduce a weight calibration framework guided by neighborhood distribution homogeneity. 

B. Neighborhood Homogeneity-Guided Weight Calibration 

The initial channel-wise weights P c ij,d obtained in Sec. IV-A via layer-wise feature transformation trends can prelimi-narily characterize the feature similarity between neighboring points and the center point. However, these weights do not account for the influence of local neighborhood distribution on feature evolution. The reference reliability of the weight P c ij,d is positively correlated with the homogeneity of the neighborhood distri-bution. During repeated neighborhood aggregation, the prop-agation and aggregation of features are closely related to the surrounding distribution. Specifically, in geometrically homo-geneous regions (e.g., smooth surface interiors), neighboring points exhibit highly consistent local structures. As network depth increases, the shared geometric context promotes feature responses to converge during iterative aggregation, thereby enhancing feature correlations among similar points. In ge-ometrically heterogeneous regions (e.g., object boundaries, corners, or structural transition zones), neighboring points may belong to different geometric primitives. Influenced by mul-tiple structural contexts, the consistency of feature responses becomes difficult to maintain and may even diverge. This observation motivates us to perform weight calibration based on neighborhood homogeneity constraints: in homoge-neous regions, weight polarization is amplified to suppress noise; in heterogeneous regions, weight differentiation is mod-erated to preserve fine structures. Building on this, we propose a three-level weight calibration framework that progressively quantifies local characteristics from channel-level P c to point-level P d and then to neighborhood-level P n , and adaptively adjusts weight differentiation at each level in a feedback manner. The overall pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. To obtain a point-wise overall similarity measure, we first aggregate the channel-wise weights along the channel dimen-sion to derive the point-wise similarity P d ij :

P d ij = 1

C

> C

X

> d=1

P c ij,d (11) 

Fig. 2: Illustration of the three-level weight calibration frame-work guided by neighborhood distribution homogeneity. The framework takes initial channel-wise weights P c ij,d as input and outputs calibrated weights wij,d .where C is the total number of feature channels. P d ij 

quantifies the overall similarity between neighboring point j

and center point i.To quantify the homogeneity of the neighborhood distri-bution, we analyze the distribution of point-wise similarities 

P d within the neighborhood of center point pi and define the neighborhood-level indicator P n i. Let vi be the actual vari-ance of P d within the neighborhood, and vmax  

> i

the theoretical maximum variance. Then P n i is defined as: 

P n i = 1 .0 − exp 



− vi

vmax 

> i



(12) Smaller P n i values indicate more uniform distribution of 

P d within the neighborhood (homogeneous regions), while larger values indicate more dispersed distribution (edge/corner regions). Based on P n i, we adopt a power-function scaling to cal-ibrate the point-wise similarity P d ij ∈ [0 , 1] . The exponent magnitude is controlled by pn i: in homogeneous regions (smaller pn i), widening the weight gap between consistent points and noise for noise suppression; in edge regions (larger 

pn i), preserving the original differences to avoid detail loss. The calibrated weight pd ′ 

> ij

is formulated as: 

P d ′ 

> ij

= ( P d ij + ϵ)γ(P n i) (13) 

γ(P n i) = exp  αn · (ζ − P n i) (14) where 13 and 14 are designed to modulate the differentiation of P d ij . Here, ζ serves as the threshold for identifying homogeneous regions, while αn controls the scaling strength, and ϵ is a small constant ensuring numerical stability. These functions adaptively adjust the exponent based on the rela-tionship between P n i and the threshold ζ, striking a balance between noise suppression and detail preservation To enhance feature differentiation across channels and pre-vent channel-wise weights from becoming overly concen-trated, we introduce a learnable linear transformation on the initial channel weights: 

P c ‘ 

> ij,g

= c ·  σ(a · (P c ij,g − b)) − σ(−a · b) (15) where a, b and c are learnable parameters. This formulation enables adaptive channel-wise modulation, improving feature discriminability across channels. 7

Finally, we combine the calibrated point-wise weight P d ′ 

> ij

,the neighborhood-level indicator P n i, and the transformed channel-wise weight P c ′ 

> ij,d

to obtain the final weight wij,d 

for neighborhood aggregation: 

wij,d = pd ′ 

> ij

· P c ′ 

> ij,d

= ( P d ij + ϵ)γ(P n i) · P c ′ 

> ij,d

(16) TABLE I: Three-Level Weight Calibration Framework                                                       

> Step Operation Input: Initial channel-wise weights P c ij,d ,hyperparameters τ,
> P c l, learnable parameters a, b, c
> Output: Calibrated weights wij,d for neighborhood aggregation 1. Point-wise Similarity Aggregation
> 1) Remove interference from duplicate padding points: if P c ij,d = 1 .0:set P c ij,d =P c l(P c lis a small constant) 2) Aggregate point-wise similarity: compute P d ij based on P c ij,d by Eq. (11) 2. Neighborhood Homogeneity Analysis
> 1) Compute the initial neighborhood homogeneity: compute range riand variance viof {P d ij }
> compute P n iby Eq. (12) 2) Low-value truncation to enhance discriminability.: if ri< τ :set P n i= 1
> 3. Point-wise Weight Calibration
> 1) Compute the compression coefficient: compute γ(P n i)by Eq. (14) 2) Calibrate the point-wise weight: compute P d ′
> ij based on γby Eq. (13) 4. Channel-wise Calibration
> 1) Channel-wise weight scaling transformation: compute P c ′
> ij,d with parameters a,b,c by Eq. (15) 2) Aggregate the weights from the remaining dimensions: compute wij,d based on P c ′
> ij,d and P d ′
> ij by Eq. (16)

The overall computation procedure is summarized in Tab. I. The proposed calibration framework constructs a com-plete description from channel-level fine-grained features to neighborhood-level distribution characteristics through pro-gressive P c → P d → P n modeling, and reversely guides the adaptive calibration of P d and P c via P n , forming a closed-loop weight optimization mechanism. This design of progressive modeling and reverse calibration enables the framework to adaptively capture local structural differences across multiple scales, effectively suppressing noise in ho-mogeneous regions while preserving critical detail features in edge regions, thereby refining the precision of neighborhood aggregation. 

C. Overall Architecture and Loss Function 

Building upon the aforementioned analysis, this paper pro-poses a lightweight adaptive neighborhood aggregation net-work for point cloud analysis: PointCRA. The overall network architecture and the internal structure of the PointCRA are illustrated in Fig. 3. The key of PointCRA lies in performing fine-grained aggre-gation correction at the end of each encoding stage. PointCRA retrieves the feature evolution sequence from preceding con-tinuous neighborhood aggregation modules, capturing the re-sponse trajectory of each point across multiple aggregation steps. Based on this statistical information, it computes adap-tive weights via the three-level calibration framework and cal-ibrates the current layer’s features. The calibrated features are then fed into an embedding layer with the same architecture as the backbone, where they are remapped to the existing feature space via standard neighborhood aggregation, completing the feature enhancement for that layer. For the adaptive scaling of P c in Eq. 15, we aim to enhance the discriminability across channels while avoiding extreme differentiation: 

Lreg = E[softplus (b)] + softplus (1 − a) + P(c; ϕl, ϕ h) (17) where ϕl and ϕh are the predefined parameter bounds. This loss function guides the formulation in Eq. 15 to smooth the initial P c , preventing extreme binary differentiation and thereby enhancing the discriminative capability of the network. To enhance the discriminability across channels, we intro-duce a loss function based on the Pearson correlation coeffi-cient for the final weights wij,d . By minimizing the projection between different channel pairs, this loss encourages different channels to capture distinct and complementary information, thereby improving the representation capacity of the network. The formula is as follows: 

Lorth = 1

C(C − 1) 

X 

> d1̸=d2

wd1 · wd2

∥wd1 ∥2∥wd2 ∥2

(18) where C is the total number of channels, wd ∈ RN ·K denotes the weight vector of channel d across all point pairs, and 

∥ · ∥ 2 represents the ℓ2 norm. The absolute value of the cosine similarity is used to penalize both positive and negative correlations. The overall training objective of the network is defined as: 

L = Ltask + λ1 · L reg + λ2 · L orth (19) where Ltask denotes the main task loss (e.g., cross-entropy loss for classification or Dice loss for segmentation), and λ1

and λ2 are weighting coefficient balancing the auxiliary loss. V. E XPERIMENTS 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we con-duct experiments on three standard benchmarks for semantic segmentation and classification tasks, i.e., S3DIS [35] for segmentation, ShapeNetPart [36] for object part segmentation and ScanObjectNN [37] for classification. We evaluate our method on different point cloud analysis backbones with stage-wise cascaded LA modules, aiming to comprehensively assess its generalization capability. All models are trained on a NVIDIA Geforce RTX 5090 32-GB GPU with a 20-core Intel Core i7-14700K CPU @3.40Ghz. We employ the CrossEntropy loss and optimize all models using the AdamW optimizer. We design PointCRA based on DeLAv1 as the baseline, and select other baseline models (PointNext, PointMetaBase, DeLAv2) for extended experiments to validate the effective-ness and transferability of the proposed method. For the sake of brevity, we denote the proposed method as CRA. PointNext 8

Fig. 3: Illustration of the mainstream point cloud analysis backbone architecture (top) and the deployment and internal structure of the proposed PointCRA (bottom). The mainstream architecture adopts an encoder-decoder framework, where only the encoder is used for classification tasks. PointCRA performs aggregation adjustment at the last layer of each encoding stage to compute channel-wise correlation weight based on the outputs of preceding serial modules. These weights are then applied to calibrate the features, followed by an embedding layer to align them with the original feature space, ensuring stable information flow to subsequent layers. is a modernized variant of PointNet++ that achieves signifi-cant performance gains through advanced data augmentation strategies and improved network architectures. PointMetaBase builds upon the PointNeXt framework and introduces an explicit spatial encoding scheme to enhance the representation capability of the network. DeLA-V1 realizes efficient and accurate spatial structure encoding by decoupling neighbor-hood aggregation from feature encoding and incorporating KNN-based edge pooling. DeLA-V2 further improves upon DeLA-V1 by refining the network architecture and introducing novel nonlinear transformations in the decoupled neighbor-hood aggregation modules to enhance representational capac-ity. To ensure a fair comparison, we select backbone versions with multi-stage cascaded architectures for which public code is available: all four backbones on S3DIS, the DeLA series (V1 and V2) on ScanNetV2 and DeLAv1 on ShapeNetPart. To ensure a fair comparison, we keep the default settings and data processing methods of the original backbone network, and also maintain consistent loss function parameter config-urations across all experiments: the homogeneous threshold is set to 0.7; the learnable weights αd and βd for P c ij and 

d are initialized to 1 and 0, respectively; For the auxiliary regularization loss, the boundary thresholds are set to ϕl = 0 .2,

ϕh = 0.8 for parameter c, ensuring they remain within reasonable ranges during training. For evaluation methods, we refer to previous work, using mean intersection over union (mIoU) and overall accuracy (OA) for semantic segmentation task and OA and mean accuracy (mAcc) for classification task. miou = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

 T P i

F N i + F P i + T P i



(20) OA =

Pni=1 T P i

n (21) mAcc = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

 T P i

T P i + F N i



(22) where TP denotes the true positive samples, FP denotes the false positive samples, FN denotes the false negative samples, 

i is the i-th indicator in the total number n of semantic classes. 

A. Semantic Segmentation on S3DIS 

Dataset: S3DIS [35] (Stanford Large-Scale 3D Indoor Spaces) is a large-scale indoor benchmark for point cloud semantic segmentation, reconstructed from RGB-D images captured by cameras equipped with structured light sensors. It comprises 3D point clouds captured from six large-scale indoor areas across three different buildings, covering over 6,000 square meters with 271 rooms . The dataset includes diverse architectural styles and functional spaces such as offices, conference rooms, hallways, restrooms, and lobbies . Each point is annotated with one of 13 semantic categories, in-cluding structural elements (ceiling, floor, wall, beam, column, window, door) and common furniture items (table, chair, sofa, bookcase, board). In our experiments, we evaluate on Area 5, which is widely adopted as a challenging test split due to its distinct scene distribution. 

Setup: For experiments on all four backbone versions, the unified settings as follows: the input point cloud is downsam-pled with a voxel size of 0.4 m; the initial learning rate is set to 0.01, and the weight decay is set to 10 −4; the batch size is set to 8. For PointNext and PointMetaBase, we fix the input to 24,000 points per sample, use an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −2, and train for 100 epochs with cosine decay to 9

TABLE II: Semantic Segmentation Results on The S3DIS Benchmark.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> Method Params(M) OA(%) mAcc(%) mIoU(%) ceiling floor wall beam column window door table chair sofa bookcase board clutter PointNet [4] (CVPR 2017) ---41.1 88.8 97.3 69.8 0.1 3.9 46.3 10.8 59.0 52.6 5.9 40.3 26.4 33.2 PointNet++ [21] (NIPS 2017) 1.0 83.0 -53.5 -------------PTV1 [13] (CVPR 2021) -90.8 -70.4 94.0 98.5 86.3 0.0 38.0 63.4 74.3 89.1 82.4 74.3 80.2 76.0 59.3 PAGWN [38] (IVC 2025) -91.4 78.2 72.2 95.0 98.1 85.9 0.0 48.7 62.0 70.0 82.7 92.1 84.4 78.3 76.8 64.0 SAT [39] (Arxiv 2023) ---72.6 93.6 98.5 87.2 0.0 49.3 61.1 73.6 83.7 91.8 81.7 77.9 82.3 63.4 HgCA [40] (NC 2026) -91.3 78.8 72.8 95.8 98.9 86.5 0.0 47.9 66.2 75.8 89.8 91.5 81.6 74.4 78.7 60.5 PointHR [41] (Arxiv 2023) -91.8 -73.2 94.0 98.5 87.5 0.0 53.7 62.9 80.2 84.2 92.5 75.4 76.5 84.8 61.8 PointDistribution [17] (TVC 2025) 28.8 91.8 79.2 73.4 95.7 98.6 85.7 0.0 43.7 57.9 78.4 85.3 92.6 88.0 78.9 83.5 65.9 PTV3 [15] (CVPR 2024) 46.2 91.7 78.9 73.4 -------------CloudMamba [42] (AAAI 2026) 16.6 --73.6 -------------DITR [43] (3DV 2026) ---74.1 -------------PointLearner [44](ICLR 2026) ---74.3 -------------PTV3 + PPT [15] (CVPR 2024) 46.2 --74.7 -------------HSBNet [45] (IF 2026) ---75.2 -------------PTV3 + sonata [46] (CVPR 2025) 124.8 93.0 81.6 76.0 -------------PointNext-L [5] (NIPS 2022) 7.1 90.0 76.0 69.0 94.0 98.5 83.5 0.0 30.3 57.3 74.2 82.1 91.2 74.5 75.5 76.7 58.9 PointMetabase-L [6] (CVPR 2023) 2.7 90.5 76.0 69.5 94.6 98.3 84.8 0.0 31.9 59.1 75.8 80.7 90.8 76.6 77.3 74.0 62.0 DeLA-V1 [47] (Arixv 2024) 26.9 91.9 79.1 73.5 95.0 98.8 87.7 0.0 51.0 63.0 72.3 84.6 93.6 79.5 79.4 80.6 63.4 DeLA-V2 [47] (Arixv 2025) 39.4 92.5 80.0 74.5 95.2 98.7 88.6 0.0 51.8 63.9 72.1 84.8 93.1 83.1 81.7 86.0 66.4 PointNext-L + CRA 7.5 90.3 (+0.3) 76.2 (+0.2) 70.0 (+1.0) 94.8 98.5 83.4 0.0 36.6 60.3 73.6 81.9 90.2 76.4 76.4 78.3 59.2 PointMetaBase-L + CRA 3.1 90.6 (+0.1) 76.1(+0.1) 70.1 (+0.6) 94.7 98.5 83.7 0.0 35.4 59.8 76.4 81.8 90.7 74.9 77.0 77.3 60.8 PointCRA (DeLA-V1+CRA) 32.2 93.9 (+2.0) 82.1 (+3.0) 77.5 (+4.0) 95.8 98.8 90.6 0.0 60.5 62.6 85.6 88.9 94.8 84.7 83.7 88.6 72.6 DeLA-V2 + CRA 44.8 93.6 (+1.1) 82.2 (+2.2) 77.3 (+2.8) 95.8 98.8 89.8 0.0 63.3 65.7 83.3 87.2 92.5 85.5 82.6 89.8 70.6

1×10 −4. For DeLA-V1 and DeLA-V2, we use a maximum of 30,000 input points, adopt an initial learning rate of 6 × 10 −3,and train for 110 epochs with decay to 6 × 10 −7.

Result: We evaluate our model using the best model of validation set to test the entire scene of S3DIS Area5, and the results are shown in Tab.II. As shown in the bottom section of Table II, incorporating the CRA consistently im-proves the performance across all baseline models. Specifi-cally, P ointN eXt − L + CRA achieves 70.0% mIoU ( ↑1.0), 

P ointM etaBase − L + CRA attains 70.1% mIoU ( ↑0.6), 

DeLA − V 2 + CRA reaches 77.3% mIoU (↑2.8), and 

P ointCRA (DeLA − V 1 + CRA ) achieves state-of-the-art level performance: 93.9% OA ( ↑2.0) 82.1% mAcc ( ↑3.0), 77.5% mIoU ( ↑4.0). The specific visualization results are shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the improved version with CRA achieves more accurate classification results in ambiguous regions with similar objects, such as paintings hung on walls, cabinets attached to walls, and keyboards on desks. This demonstrates that the incorporation of CRA enhances the discriminative capability of object features. Experimental results demonstrate that the four backbone networks, despite their diverse training frameworks and feature encoding paradigms, achieve con-sistent performance gains after incorporating the CRA mod-ule. The improvements across subcategories exhibit a similar consistency, with particularly notable gains on challenging classes that are prone to confusion with adjacent objects due to analogous spatial distributions, such as column, window, door, and clutter. 

B. Classification on ScanObjectNN 

Dataset: ScanObjectNN [37] is a real-world 3D point cloud dataset for object classification, introduced to address the limitations of synthetic datasets like ModelNet40. The dataset is derived from the SceneNN dataset, which collects real indoor scenes using an RGB-D sensor (Kinect v2) . Objects are automatically segmented and extracted from these reconstructed indoor scenes, resulting in approximately 15,000 objects across 15 categories, sourced from 2,902 unique in-stances . The dataset provides multiple variants with increasing difficulty to simulate real-world challenges such as background clutter, occlusion, and object partiality. In our experiments, we adopt the PB T50 RS variant, which is the most challenging and widely used benchmark setting. It incorporates random translation, random rotation, and uniform scaling to jointly simulate perturbation, background, and scaling effects. 

Setup: The unified settings as follows: we apply random rotation around the Y-axis, random scaling in [0.9, 1.1], point shuffling, and the fix the input to 2048 points per sample. For DeLA series experiments, we follow the original settings with a batch size of 32, label smoothing of 0.2, initial learning rate of 3 × 10 −3, and decay rate of 5 × 10 −2. DeLA-V1 is trained for 250 epochs, while DeLA-V2 is trained for 400 epochs. 

Result: We evaluate our model on the most challenging PB T50 RS variant of ScanObjectNN, and the results are shown in Tab.IV. As shown in the bottom section of Table IV, incorporating the CRA module consistently improves perfor-mance across both DeLA backbones. Specifically, DeLAv 1 + 

CRA achieves 90.4% OA ( ↑0.3) and 89.3% mAcc ( ↑0.7), while DeLAv 2 + CRA achieves 91.6% OA ( ↑0.3) and 90.6% mAcc ( ↑1.3), setting new state-of-the-art performance on this challenging benchmark. 

C. Object Part Segmentation on ShapeNetPart 

Dataset: ShapeNetPart [36] is a widely used 3D point cloud dataset for fine-grained part segmentation, derived from 10 

Fig. 4: Comparison of the experimental results on S3DIS area5. The red rectangles indicate classification error regions of the original baseline model, while the blue rectangles indicate regions where the improved model achieves correct classification for comparison. ShapeNetCore, a large-scale repository of 3D CAD models. The dataset comprises 16,881 models across 16 object cate-gories, with each category containing 2 to 6 parts, resulting in a total of 50 annotated part segments. Unlike real-world scanned datasets, ShapeNetPart consists of clean, synthetic CAD models that provide complete and noise-free object geometries. Each point in the point cloud is annotated with a part category label (e.g., airplane wings, table legs, chair arms). Following the standard evaluation protocol, we train on the official training split (14,006 models) and report instance-average mIoU and class-average mIoU on the test split (2,874 models). 

Setup: For PointCRA experiment on ShapeNetPart, we adopt the following configuration: The input points are nor-malized to a range of 40 and each sample contains 2,048 points with normals; During training,the initial learning rate is set as 

2 × 10 −3 with the weight decay of 5 × 10 −2. Label smoothing of 0.2 is applied during training. We train the model for 250 11 

TABLE III: Classification Results On The ScanObjectNN Benchmark.                                           

> Method OA(%) mAcc(%) Param (M) PointNet [4] (CVPR 2017) 68.2 63.4 3.5 DGCNN [48] (TVC 2023) 78.1 73.6 1.8 PointCNN [23] (NIPS 2018) 78.5 75.1 0.6 PointStack [49] (RS 2024) 86.9 85.8 -DGCNN(ACN) [50] (IJIES 2025) 82.1 --PCM [51] (AAAI 2025) 88.1 86.6 34.2 PGCF [52] (PR 2026) 89.3 88.2 1.4 MVFormer [53] (IJCV 2026) 90.7 --CPG [54] (PR 2026) 91.3 --DeLAv1 [47] (Arxiv 2024) 90.1 88.6 5.3 DeLAv2 [47] (Arxiv 2025) 91.3 90.3 3.5 PointCRA (DeLAv1+CRA) 90.4(+0.3) 89.3(+0.7) 6.1 DeLAv2+CRA 91.6(+0.3) 90.6(+1.3) 4.3

epochs with a batch size of 32. TABLE IV: Classification Results On The ShapeNetPart Benchmark.                                     

> Method Ins mIoU(%) Cat mIoU(%) Param (M) PointNet++ [21] (NIPS 2017) 82.1 --S3DNet [55] (NN 2025) 85.0 --AdaCrossNet [50] (IJIES 2025) -85.1 -DGCNN [48] (TVC 2023) 85.2 --PointGL [56] (TMM 2024) 85.6 83.8 -PointCNN [23] (NIPS 2018) 86.1 84.6 -PGCF [52] (PR 2026) 87.2 85.5 22.7 CloudMamba [42] (AAAI 2026) 86.6 -16.6 MVFormer-l [53] (IJCV 2026) 87.1 --DeLAv1 [47] (Arixiv 2024) 86.9 85.4 7.6 PointCRA 87.4(+0.5) 85.5(+0.1) 9.2

D. Ablation Study 

Ablation of Main Improvements: In order to further verify the effectiveness of PointCRA, we choose the data set S3DIS Area5 for ablation study. For fair comparison, we did not change the training parameters. We decompose the proposed PointCRA into three com-ponents: channel-wise weight P c calibration, a multi-level calibration framework based on neighborhood homogeneity distribution, and a learnable weight mapping. Accordingly, we design three ablation experiments: Experiment A introduces only the channel-wise P c calibration aggregation based on DeLA-V1; Experiment B incorporates three-level calibration upon experiment A; Experiment C further introduces a learn-able scaling mapping upon experiment B. Experiment Dfurther introduces the loss constraint upon experiment C. The experimental results are presented in Table V. TABLE V: Ablation Results of PointCRA.                               

> Ablate mIoU △
> baseline(DeLAv1) 73.5 -
> A:→P c calibration 76.2 +2.7
> B:A→+three −level calibration 77.1 +0.9
> C:B→+learnable scaling mapping 77.3 +0.2
> D:C→+loss constraint 77.5 +0.2

Ablation of Calibration: To further validate the effective-ness of our proposed three-level calibration framework, we also conduct ablation experiments on S3DIS Area 5 while keeping the training parameters consistent. We decompose the weight calibration framework into four components, corresponding to four experiments: A: the basic weighted computation of channel-level weights Pc; B: intro-ducing the computation and weighting of point-wise similari-ties Pg based on A; C: introducing the computation of Pn and the calibration of Pg based on B; D: introducing a learnable scaling mapping for Pc based on C. The experimental results are presented in Table VI. TABLE VI: Ablation Results of Calibration.                             

> Ablate mIoU △
> baseline(DeLAv1) 73.5 -
> A:→P c weighted 76.2 +2.7
> B:A→+P g weighted 76.8 +0.6
> C:B→+P n computed and P g Calibrated 77.1 +0.3
> D:C→+learnable scaling mapping 77.3 +0.2

Ablation of Group Size: We also conduct comparative experiments on the number of feature channel groups G. The value of G is varied from 1 to 12, and the baseline model remains DeLA-V1 + CRA on S3DIS Area5. For different settings of G, we adopt a zero-padding strategy to ensure that the number of feature channels can be completely grouped. The experimental results are shown in Figure 5. 

Fig. 5: Effect of Channel Group Size (G) on Performance (PointCRA). We can observe that as G increases, the total number of parameters decreases correspondingly, following an ex-ponential decay trend. Meanwhile, the overall performance remains at a comparable level in the early stage when G = 1 

to 4, and gradually declines thereafter. In terms of overall experimental results, if the value of G is not divisible by the number of channels, it will have a significant negative impact. A smaller grouping granularity (i.e., a smaller G)leads to better performance but also incurs a larger parameter count. After comprehensively comparing the overall results, we select G = 4 as a balanced setting between performance and parameter overhead. 12 

Fig. 6: Visualization of the P n distribution (DeLA-V1 + CRA on ShapeNetPart).We extract the P n values of each point from the CRA modules across four stages and visualize them as heatmaps (the P n values correspond to the color bar on the left, from small to large). The upper row shows the original P n value distribution, and the lower row shows the distribution of points with P n values in the top 15% that are highlight in red, i.e., regions with significant neighborhood distribution differences. 

E. Analysis Study 

Analysis of Neighborhood Homogeneity: To further an-alyze the effectiveness of our proposed method in Section IV, we conduct statistical experiments on the neighborhood homogeneity coefficient P n using the DeLA-V1 + CRA model on the part segmentation dataset ShapeNetPart. The visualization results are shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, we present the P n distribution across four stages. It can be observed that the P n distributions at each stage are highly discriminative. The blue-green points, representing high-homogeneity regions, are relatively sparse and concen-trated in shallower stages. In the first stage, they are mostly located in uniformly colored regions, while in subsequent stages, they gradually become concentrated in the central areas of object parts (indicating that the representational meaning of features progressively shifts from low-level geometric patterns to high-level semantic information). As the stage deepens, the proportion of blue-green points gradually increases, evolving from discrete point-like distributions into continuous block-like patterns (reflecting the progressive strengthening of neigh-borhood homogeneity and the formation of compact semantic clusters). In the fourth stage, regions such as the wings are entirely composed of homogeneous points (indicating that point features in deeper layers possess stronger semantic representability). In contrast, the red points, representing high-difference regions ( P n values in the top 15%), are more abundant in shallower stages and are mainly distributed in areas with abrupt color or texture changes such as the wing and fuselage pattern (corresponding to low-level feature differences). In the second and third stages, red points are primarily located along edges and boundaries, transitioning from texture-abrupt areas to geometric edges; Especially in Stage 3, the red points exhibit a thin-line distribution along the boundaries.(reflecting the network’s progressive abstraction from low-level features to high-level semantic features). By the fourth stage, red points are concentrated at the junctions between different com-ponents, such as landing gear-fuselage connections, engine-wing connections, and wing-fuselage connections, appearing as spots (corresponding to the semantic differences captured by high-level features). The visualization results in Fig. 6 demonstrate that the progressive evolution of the P n distribution intuitively reveals the feature abstraction process of deep point cloud networks from lower to higher layers. PointCRA adaptively enhances intra-part homogeneity while reinforcing inter-part differenti-ation, without interfering with the original feature encoding of the backbone network. It maintains stable discriminability even in complex regions where multiple components intersect. Ultimately, in Stage 4, blue-green points fully cover the interiors of parts, while red points are precisely concentrated at part boundaries. This distribution pattern closely aligns with the goal of part segmentation, ie, achieving internal consistency with clear boundaries, which strongly validates the effectiveness of the PointCRA in improving semantic boundary perception. 

Analysis of Weight Calibration: To further analyze the effect of our proposed three-level weight calibration frame-work based on neighborhood distribution homogeneity, we conducted additional statistical experiments on the ShapeNet-Part dataset. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the homogeneity of point cloud features is progressively strengthened with increasing network depth, and point features tend to become increasingly similar. Accordingly, we collected the initial and calibrated weights of P g and P c across different stages. The statistical results are presented in Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 7a and 7b, the standard deviation of both 

P g and P c weights increases notably after calibration, indicat-ing enhanced feature discriminability. Furthermore, the mean distributions in Fig. 7c and 7d demonstrate that the calibrated weights exhibit a broader distribution than the initially overly similar ones. This alleviates weight saturation and promotes 13 

(a) P g Standard Deviation (b) P c Standard Deviation 

(c) P g Mean (d) P c Mean 

Fig. 7: Analysis of calibration better feature discrimination, leading to improved network performance. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we propose the PointCRA, a lightweight improvement method for point cloud analysis networks via neighborhood aggregation enhancement. Unlike existing meth-ods that rely on coarse-grained point-level or channel-level metrics, PointCRA introduces a fine-grained channel-wise affinity metric based on feature transformation trends across sequential modules. Building on this, we construct a three-level calibration framework guided by neighborhood homo-geneity to adaptively calibrate the weights, complemented by a dedicated loss function that enhances channel discriminability through orthogonality constraints. Extensive experiments on three public benchmarks demon-strate that integrating CRA into modern backbone networks consistently improves performance across various training frameworks and feature encoding paradigms. Multiple ablation and visualization studies validate the effectiveness of each proposed component, while the analysis of channel grouping provides practical guidance for deployment. The proposed method offers a lightweight, interpretable, and efficient so-lution for enhancing discriminative feature learning in point cloud analysis. REFERENCES [1] Y. Liu, C. Zhang, X. Dong, and J. Ning, “Point cloud-based deep learning in industrial production: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys ,vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1–36, 2025. [2] W. Gao, L. Xie, S. Fan, G. Li, S. Liu, and W. Gao, “Deep learning-based point cloud compression: An in-depth survey and benchmark,” 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [3] B. Fei, J. Xu, Y. Li, W. Yang, Q. Zhou, L. Liu, T. Luo, and Y. He, “Self-supervised learning for pre-training 3d point clouds: A survey,” 

Computational Visual Media , 2026. [4] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2017, pp. 652–660. [5] G. Qian, Y. Li, H. Peng, J. Mai, H. Hammoud, M. Elhoseiny, and B. Ghanem, “Pointnext: Revisiting pointnet++ with improved training and scaling strategies,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 23 192–23 204, 2022. [6] H. Lin, X. Zheng, L. Li, F. Chao, S. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Tian, and R. Ji, “Meta architecture for point cloud analysis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2023, pp. 17 682–17 691. [7] X. Deng, W. Zhang, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “Pointvector: a vector representation in point cloud analysis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 9455–9465. [8] Z. Zeng, H. Qiu, J. Zhou, Z. Dong, J. Xiao, and B. Li, “Pointnat: Large scale point cloud semantic segmentation via neighbor aggregation with transformer,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,2024. [9] W. Wu, L. Fuxin, and Q. Shan, “Pointconvformer: Revenge of the point-based convolution,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 21 802–21 813. [10] P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson, “Rademacher and gaussian complexi-ties: Risk bounds and structural results,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 3, no. Nov, pp. 463–482, 2002. [11] X. Li, F. Li, X. Fern, and R. Raich, “Filter shaping for convolutional neural networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2017. [12] M.-H. Guo, J.-X. Cai, Z.-N. Liu, T.-J. Mu, R. R. Martin, and S.-M. Hu, “Pct: Point cloud transformer,” Computational Visual Media , vol. 7, pp. 187–199, 2021. [13] H. Zhao, L. Jiang, J. Jia, P. H. Torr, and V. Koltun, “Point transformer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 16 259–16 268. [14] X. Wu, Y. Lao, L. Jiang, X. Liu, and H. Zhao, “Point transformer v2: Grouped vector attention and partition-based pooling,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 33 330–33 342, 2022. [15] X. Wu, L. Jiang, P.-S. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Qiao, W. Ouyang, T. He, and H. Zhao, “Point transformer v3: Simpler faster stronger,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 4840–4851. [16] S. Sun, Y. Rao, J. Lu, and H. Yan, “X-3d: Explicit 3d structure modeling for point cloud recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 5074–5083. [17] J. Shi, J. Xiao, X. Hu, B. Song, H. Jiang, T. Chen, and B. Zhang, “Enhancing point cloud analysis via neighbor aggregation correction based on cross-stage structure correlation: J. shi et al.” The Visual Computer , pp. 1–17, 2025. [18] M. Zhang, H. You, P. Kadam, S. Liu, and C.-C. J. Kuo, “Pointhop: An explainable machine learning method for point cloud classification,” 

IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1744–1755, 2020. [19] J. Lin, J. Zou, K. Chen, J. Chai, and J. Zuo, “Ca-net: a context-awareness and cross-channel attention-based network for point cloud understanding,” Measurement Science and Technology , vol. 36, no. 4, p. 045207, 2025. [20] Y. Chen, F. Guo, J. Liu, S. Dai, J. Huang, and X. Cai, “Overlapping point cloud registration algorithm based on knn and the channel attention mechanism,” Plos one , vol. 20, no. 6, p. e0325261, 2025. [21] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [22] W. Wu, Z. Qi, and L. Fuxin, “Pointconv: Deep convolutional networks on 3d point clouds,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2019, pp. 9621–9630. [23] Y. Li, R. Bu, M. Sun, W. Wu, X. Di, and B. Chen, “Pointcnn: Convolution on x-transformed points,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018. [24] H. Thomas, C. R. Qi, J.-E. Deschaud, B. Marcotegui, F. Goulette, and L. J. Guibas, “Kpconv: Flexible and deformable convolution for point clouds,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2019, pp. 6411–6420. [25] H. Thomas, Y.-H. H. Tsai, T. D. Barfoot, and J. Zhang, “Kpconvx: Modernizing kernel point convolution with kernel attention,” in Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 5525–5535. [26] M. Xu, R. Ding, H. Zhao, and X. Qi, “Paconv: Position adaptive convo-lution with dynamic kernel assembling on point clouds,” in Proceedings 14 

of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2021, pp. 3173–3182. [27] M. Feng, L. Zhang, X. Lin, S. Z. Gilani, and A. Mian, “Point attention network for semantic segmentation of 3d point clouds,” Pattern Recog-nition , vol. 107, p. 107446, 2020. [28] P. Wu, B. Chai, H. Li, M. Zheng, Y. Peng, Z. Wang, X. Nie, Y. Zhang, and X. Sun, “Spiking point transformer for point cloud classification,” in 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 20, 2025, pp. 21 563–21 571. [29] X.-F. Han, Y.-F. Jin, H.-X. Cheng, and G.-Q. Xiao, “Dual transformer for point cloud analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 25, pp. 5638–5648, 2022. [30] J. Park, S. Lee, S. Kim, Y. Xiong, and H. J. Kim, “Self-positioning point-based transformer for point cloud understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2023, pp. 21 814–21 823. [31] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 7132–7141. [32] Z. Qin, P. Zhang, F. Wu, and X. Li, “Fcanet: Frequency channel attention networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 783–792. [33] X. Liu, L. Zhu, S. Zhu, and L. Luo, “Distance guided channel weighting for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12679 , 2020. [34] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, and Q. Hu, “Eca-net: Efficient channel attention for deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2020, pp. 11 534–11 542. [35] I. Armeni, O. Sener, A. R. Zamir, H. Jiang, I. Brilakis, M. Fischer, and S. Savarese, “3d semantic parsing of large-scale indoor spaces,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 1534–1543. [36] A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li, S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su et al. , “Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012 , 2015. [37] M. A. Uy, Q.-H. Pham, B.-S. Hua, T. Nguyen, and S.-K. Yeung, “Re-visiting point cloud classification: A new benchmark dataset and clas-sification model on real-world data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2019, pp. 1588–1597. [38] Q. Wang, S. Shi, J. Li, W. Jiang, and X. Zhang, “Window normalization: enhancing point cloud understanding by unifying inconsistent point densities,” Image and Vision Computing , p. 105789, 2025. [39] J. Zhou, Y. Xiong, C. Chiu, F. Liu, and X. Gong, “Sat: size-aware transformer for 3d point cloud semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.06869 , 2023. [40] X. Hou, H. Feng, Z. Li, S. Zhou, J. Wang, Z. Fang, and X.-Q. Jiang, “Hgca: Hypergraph neural network with cross-attention for point cloud analysis,” Neurocomputing , p. 132874, 2026. [41] H. Qiu, B. Yu, Y. Chen, and D. Tao, “Pointhr: Exploring high-resolution architectures for 3d point cloud segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07743 , 2023. [42] K. Qu, P. Gao, Q. Dai, Z. Ye, R. Ye, and Y. Sun, “Cloudmamba: Grouped selective state spaces for point cloud analysis,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 40, no. 11, 2026, pp. 8659–8667. [43] K. Knaebel, K. Yilmaz, D. de Geus, A. Hermans, D. Adrian, T. Linder, and B. Leibe, “DINO in the room: Leveraging 2D foundation models for 3D segmentation,” in 2026 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2026. [44] K. Qu, P. Gao, Q. Dai, and Y. Sun, “Point-focused attention meets context-scan state space: Robust biological visual perception for point cloud representation,” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .[45] X. Ning, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Yan, T. Wang, B. Lu, Y. Wang, and W. Li, “Hsbnet: Fusing semantics and anisotropic thermal diffusion fields for boundary-aware point cloud segmentation,” 

Information Fusion , p. 104246, 2026. [46] X. Wu, D. DeTone, D. Frost, T. Shen, C. Xie, N. Yang, J. Engel, R. Newcombe, H. Zhao, and J. Straub, “Sonata: Self-supervised learning of reliable point representations,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 2025, pp. 22 193–22 204. [47] B. Chen, Y. Xia, Y. Zang, C. Wang, and J. Li, “Decoupled local aggregation for point cloud learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16532 ,2023. [48] L. Chen and Q. Zhang, “Ddgcn: graph convolution network based on direction and distance for point cloud learning,” The visual computer ,vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 863–873, 2023. [49] K. T. Wijaya, D.-H. Paek, and S.-H. Kong, “Advanced feature learning on point clouds using multi-resolution features and learnable pooling,” 

Remote Sensing , vol. 16, no. 11, p. 1835, 2024. [50] O. V. Putra, K. Ogata, E. M. Yuniarno, and M. H. Purnomo, “Adacross-net: Adaptive dynamic loss weighting for cross-modal contrastive point cloud learning.” International Journal of Intelligent Engineering & Systems , vol. 18, no. 1, 2025. [51] T. Zhang, X. Li, H. Yuan, S. Ji, and S. Yan, “Point could mamba: Point cloud learning via state space model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00762 ,2024. [52] H. Xu, L. Hu, Q. Li, S. Liu, D. M. Yan, and X. Liu, “Point geometrical coulomb force: An explicit and robust embedding for point cloud analysis,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 170, p. 112025, 2026. [53] R. Wang, X. Ying, and B. Xing, “Mvformer: Multi-view point cloud transformer for 3d mechanical component recognition,” International Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 134, no. 1, p. 7, 2026. [54] J. Zhou, Y. Song, C. Chiu et al. , “Cpg: Contrastive patch-graph learning for 3d point cloud,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 169, p. 111954, 2026. [55] Y. Lu, Z. Pan, R. Zhang et al. , “Spatially-enhanced spiking neural network for efficient point cloud analysis,” Neural Networks , p. 108190, 2025. [56] J. Li, J. Wang, and T. Xu, “Pointgl: A simple global-local framework for efficient point cloud analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,vol. 26, pp. 6931–6942, 2024.