Title: CADFS: A Big CAD Program Dataset and Framework for Computer-Aided Design with Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01925v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:28:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# CADFS: A Big CAD Program Dataset and Framework for Computer-Aided Design with Large Language Models 

## Vladislav Pyatov 1,2 Gleb Bobrovskikh 1 Saveliy Galochkin 3,1 Nikita Boldyrev 1

## Oleg Voynov 1,3 Alexander Filippov 2 Gonzalo Ferrer 1 Peter Wonka 4 Evgeny Burnaev 1,3 1Applied AI Institute 2AI Foundation and Algorithm Lab 3AXXX 4KAUST chamfer fillet 

loft revolve 

Figure 1. We propose a new framework for generative CAD with large language models that enables generation of more complex designs compared to prior frameworks. Left: designs generated with a VLM based on our framework. The core of our framework is a new CAD design history representation that enables a broader range of modeling operations. Right: examples using advanced operations. 

## Abstract 

We introduce CADFS, a data-centric framework that en-ables large vision-language models to generate complex CAD design histories. Existing generative CAD systems are restricted to sketch-extrude operations due to simplified representations and limited datasets. We address this by introducing a FeatureScript-based representation and con-structing a dataset of 450k real-world CAD models spanning 15 modeling operations. We obtain the dataset via a new pipeline that reconstructs clean, executable FeatureScript programs and provides multimodal annotations. Fine-tuning a VLM on this representation yields state-of-the-art results in text-conditioned CAD generation and image-based recon-struction, producing more accurate, diverse, and feature-rich designs than prior frameworks. Ablations show that each individual component of our framework, i.e ., the Fea-tureScript representation, the extended operation set, and representation-aligned textual descriptions, significantly im-proves performance. Our framework substantially broadens the complexity and realism achievable in generative CAD. The CADFS framework and the new dataset are available at voyleg.github.io/cadfs. 

## 1. Introduction 

Designing 3D components is a core task across engineering domains such as industrial manufacturing or architecture. While computer-aided design (CAD) tools have become the standard for assisting this process, creating high-quality 3D models still requires substantial time and expert effort. Recent advances in AI promise to significantly reduce this effort by enabling the automated creation and reconstruction of CAD models from diverse inputs such as images [ 3 , 23 ], drawings [ 7 ], natural language descriptions [ 4, 14 , 16 , 20 ,33, 39], or point clouds [13, 19, 25, 31, 35, 40]. A growing body of work focuses on generating CAD models in boundary representation (B-rep) format, pro-ducing output that is directly suitable for manufacturing pipelines [ 23 , 35 , 43 ]. However, practicing engineers typi-cally design geometry not by editing surfaces directly, but by constructing a design history, i.e ., a sequence of parametric modeling operations ( e.g ., sketching curves and extruding them into solids). This feature-based representation provides greater flexibility and editability, allowing engineers to re-vise, extend, or refine models throughout the design process. Consequently, generating CAD models as design histories rather than B-reps is increasingly seen as the more impactful 1

> arXiv:2605.01925v1 [cs.CV] 3 May 2026

goal for practical computer-aided design automation. Early approaches to design history generation trained generative models from scratch [ 7 , 16 , 36 , 41 ]. Motivated by the rapid advances and strong generalization capabili-ties of large language and vision-language models (LLMs and VLMs), recent methods adopt these models to gener-ate CAD construction sequences, achieving promising few-shot [ 4, 5 ] and fine-tuned results [ 14 , 19 , 27 , 40 ]. Yet, de-spite these advances, the complexity of designs generated by existing methods remains limited. A primary bottleneck is the training data: all existing large-scale design history datasets [ 11 , 14 , 16 , 31 , 36 , 39 , 40 ] contain only designs composed of two basic operations (sketch and extrude). As a result, the models trained on these datasets struggle to generate parts requiring richer design operations, such as chamfers, fillets, revolves, or lofts. This limitation stems from the representation of the de-sign history adopted in prior datasets. In this simplified token-based sequence representation [ 16 , 36 , 40 ], a new operation in the design history can only refer to the previ-ously issued operations directly. However, many standard CAD operations ( e.g ., fillet, chamfer, or loft) act on or ref-erence specific elements of the evolving geometry, such as newly extruded edges. As a result, this representation in-herently limits the available operation set, constraining the expressiveness and complexity of models. Moreover, its compactness was intended for efficient autoregressive mod-eling and may not be the best fit for LLMs, required to learn an artificial token syntax from scratch. Further works adopt more expressive and natural Python-based CAD scripting interfaces [ 11 , 14 , 31 , 39 ] but still restrict the underlying geometry to the same limited operation set. To address these limitations, we propose CADFS , a new data-centric framework for generative CAD with vision-language models. At the core of CADFS is a new repre-sentation of the design history. To train a generative model, we collect real-world CAD designs created by engineers on the Onshape platform [ 2]. In contrast to prior work, we rep-resent the designs in their native form rather than translating them into a custom simplified representation. This enables us to incorporate a significantly broader range of modeling operations while retaining the full geometric and parametric fidelity of the original designs. As a result, we use more complex, diverse, and detailed CAD models for training. We represent each model as an executable program in FeatureScript, Onshape’s native language for parametric CAD [ 1 ]. This code representation is well-suited for LLMs: it is syntactically structured, semantically interpretable, and expresses modeling logic directly rather than through lossy abstractions. Prior code representations for generative CAD, based on Python wrappers around geometric kernels ( e.g ., CadQuery), primarily target procedural modeling workflows. In contrast, FeatureScript is the native language of a CAD system used by practicing engineers. This makes it directly aligned with real engineering modeling practices. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore FeatureScript code as a training representation for generative CAD. To train VLMs to generate designs in this new represen-tation, we introduce a new large-scale dataset for generative CAD. Since Onshape does not directly expose clean, exe-cutable FeatureScript programs for existing models, we de-velop a data acquisition pipeline to reconstruct high-quality FeatureScript code from Onshape’s internal representation. Our pipeline unifies parameters, removes redundant expres-sions, resolves implicit references, and produces consistent, human-readable, executable modeling scripts. To enable multimodal generative design research, we annotate each CAD model with natural language descriptions and provide rendered images and point clouds. Our dataset includes over 450k real-world CAD designs constructed using 15 common modeling operations, substantially expanding the diversity of feature-based CAD training data. The VLM trained with this representation achieves state-of-the-art results in text-conditioned CAD generation and image-conditioned CAD reconstruction. It produces CAD models with greater geometric variety, higher detail, and more accurate structure, while enabling the generation of previously unattainable feature types (see Fig. 1). In summary, we make the following contributions: • We enable learning CAD design history generation with a much broader set of modeling operations (extending from 2 to 15) by introducing a FeatureScript-based represen-tation and collecting a large-scale dataset of real-world CAD designs in this form. • We present the first vision-language model for this repre-sentation capable of modeling complex designs beyond sketch and extrude. • Our framework expands the diversity and complexity of generative CAD and advances the state of the art across multiple CAD generation and reconstruction tasks. 

## 2. Related work 

Methods of generative CAD. Prior work approaches CAD generation via either neural sequence modeling of con-struction steps and parameters or program synthesis that produces executable code. Sequence models trained from scratch optimize next-step likelihood over tokenized histo-ries, sometimes with multimodal conditioning [ 7, 13 , 16 , 25 ,36 , 41 , 42 , 45 ]. More recent program-synthesis methods leverage pre-trained LLM backbones to produce executable scripts, improving robustness and geometric fidelity with execution-in-the-loop verification, or fine-tuning with mul-timodal representation learning, chain-of-thought planning, and reinforcement-learning [ 4, 5, 14 , 19 , 20 , 27 , 33 ]. While these works demonstrate the promise of achieving strong 2results with LLM backbones, they still use a narrow vocabu-lary of operations limited to sketch and extrude commands. This affects the complexity and practicality of generated de-signs and limits generalization to real engineering workflows. An orthogonal research direction focuses on direct gener-ation of B-reps with diffusion-based methods [ 23 , 35 , 43 ], which demonstrate greater diversity and complexity in the generated models. Yet, these methods do not recover design history and thus lack an important aspect of practical use. 

Representations of CAD design history and datasets. 

Early 3D model collections provide either polygonal meshes [ 6 , 17 , 28 , 37 , 47 ] or B-rep geometry [ 8, 18 ], but no design histories, limiting their use for modeling construction processes. Fusion 360 Gallery [ 34 ] and CC3D-Ops [ 12 ]were the first datasets to tie CAD models to design steps by annotating 3D data with operation labels or sequences. Yet these datasets are modest in scale and complexity and therefore do not support training large generative models. Most recent large-scale design history datasets convert models from the Onshape library [ 2] into either a simplified token-based representation or Python code. DeepCAD [ 36 ]standardizes token sequences with quantized parameters. This enables autoregressive training, but reduces geometric fidelity and forces models to learn an artificial syntax from scratch. Crucially, this format can only reference prior op-erations ( e.g ., sketch, extrude), not the geometric entities that they produce ( e.g ., edges, faces). As a result, it can-not express operations such as fillet, loft, or replication that require structured geometric queries, i.e ., selecting specific entities that arise during construction. This restriction limits the diversity and scale of trainable CAD histories. Deriva-tive datasets [ 16 , 40 ] expand annotations for conditional generation yet inherit these constraints. Code-centric datasets [ 11 , 14 , 31 , 39 ] represent design histories as modular, interpretable Python programs, typ-ically based on the CadQuery library [ 9], leveraging pre-trained LLMs’ understanding of Python code. Compared to token sequences, this representation offers richer CAD func-tionality and supports operations depending on the evolving geometry. However, it uses indirect or topology-dependent references to the geometric entities ( e.g ., “the third edge of the final solid”). Such referencing is unstable under small modeling edits and fails to preserve the construction history of geometric entities. This limits the ability of learning-based methods to reliably infer or reproduce complex feature con-struction steps. Datasets based on this representation remain limited to primitive operations. Overall, both representations introduce structural limita-tions that reduce expressiveness and restrict the available modeling operations. The corresponding datasets support only sketch and extrude, along with a small set of sketch primitives: lines, circles, and arcs. Furthermore, conversion from Onshape’s native representation requires lossy transla-                                

> Table 1. Comparison of our dataset with existing design history benchmarks. We provide designs in the new representation featur-ing the largest set of modeling operations and the largest number of real-world designs (CAD-Recode provides synthetic data). Dataset Representation # Ops. # Designs Source Fusion 360 Cmd. sequence 28,625 Real DeepCAD Cmd. sequence 2179,000 Real Text2CAD Cmd. sequence 2170,000 Real Omni-CAD Cmd. sequence 2275,000 Real cadrille Python code 2170,000 Real CAD-Recode Python code 21,000,000 Synth. CADFS (Ours) FeatureScript 15 451,000 Real
> [34] [36] [16] [40] [19] [31]

tion that discards geometric and parametric fidelity, yielding approximations rather than exact reproductions of the origi-nals. While recent works address different issues ( e.g ., short sequence length [ 22 ], or alignment with software UI [ 26 ]), the operation vocabulary and design history faithfulness re-main the principal bottlenecks. In contrast, we build our CADFS framework based on Onshape’s native representation. This preserves full geo-metric and parametric fidelity and supports a substantially broader set of modeling operations, enabling training on more complex, diverse, and detailed CAD histories. Table 1 compares our dataset with prior design history datasets. 

## 3. Method 

The foundation of our framework for generative CAD is a new representation of the design history. Specifically, we propose to train LLM-based models to write code in Fea-tureScript language, used by the Onshape platform. We develop a data acquisition pipeline that converts Onshape’s internal CAD representation into clean, compact, and fully executable code suitable for training. Using this pipeline, we collect a large set of CAD designs in the new represen-tation and annotate each design with a textual description and multi-view images. Finally, we adopt an existing VLM to generate CAD designs in the new representation and fine-tune it on the new dataset for text-conditioned generation and reconstruction from multi-view images. Figure 3 shows an overview of our method. 

3.1. FeatureScript code for generative CAD 

FeatureScript is the native language used within Onshape to define parametric modeling operations and 3D geome-try. It directly exposes the full set of modeling operations supported by the platform, including refinement and transfor-mation operations missing in previous datasets. In contrast to prior representations, FeatureScript enables robust and precise specification of operations such as fillet or loft via structured queries. Furthermore, using FeatureScript as the 3bc

## d

## e

## aFigure 2. Example of FeatureScript code that describes the design history of the model shown on the right. (a) The profile of the rocket body is drawn using spline primitives and revolved about an axis. (b) The profile of the tail wing is drawn using arcs and text primitives and then extruded. (c) The wing tip is identified as the edge created by extruding the junction between the arcs of the wing profile. (d) The identified wing tip is rounded with a fillet, and the wing is replicated using a circular pattern. (e) A rectangular face of the wing is smoothly connected to a round base using a loft to form a stand for the rocket, and the corresponding wing is removed. 

training representation allows us to leverage a continuously growing corpus of real-world CAD designs authored by prac-ticing engineers, without requiring lossy conversion steps. As a result, our FeatureScript-based framework naturally re-flects real industrial modeling practices, rather than synthetic workflows designed around representational limitations. FeatureScript queries enable modeling operations to tar-get existing geometric entities (edges, faces, bodies) defined by their origin, construction history, or relations to other entities. Figure 2 shows an example CAD model and its corresponding FeatureScript code. In this example, queries, represented by the function makeQuery in lines 16, 19, and 22, are used (1) to round the edge produced by a specific extrusion originating from the connection point between spe-cific sketch primitives, (2) to replicate the body produced by that extrusion using a circular pattern, (3) to connect a specific face of this body to another face using a smooth transition, and (4) to delete this body created only as an intermediate for subsequent operations. The function makeQuery takes as input an operation identifier, a query type, an entity type, and disambiguation data. The operation identifier scopes the query to a spe-cific modeling operation within the feature history, e.g ., the extrusion with id F5 . The query type encodes the topolog-ical role of the target entity within that operation, e.g ., a side edge is SWEPT EDGE . The entity type indicates the class of geometric entities targeted by the query, i.e ., ver-tex, edge, face, or body. Finally, the disambiguation data provides the additional information needed to resolve am-biguities and uniquely identify the intended entities when multiple candidates satisfy the query conditions. The most common mechanisms are original set disambiguation and 

topology disambiguation , which specify either the entity’s ancestors or its neighbors, as in Fig. 2 line 17. Together, these four parameters form a compact but expressive ad-dressing scheme that enables robust references to individual geometric entities within a parametric CAD history. Notably, this representation mirrors the way a human would verbally identify a geometric feature, i.e ., by its origin, semantic role, categorical type, and distinguishing attributes. This correspondence makes the queries particularly amenable to generation by large language models. Overall, our repre-sentation preserves exact geometric and parametric fidelity while remaining compact and interpretable, making it well-suited for LLM-based generative modeling and downstream editing workflows. 

3.2. Data acquisition and the dataset 

While FeatureScript is Onshape’s native representation, for manually created models the platform provides only an in-ternal representation that is neither directly executable nor interpretable. This representation contains issues such as implicit parameterization, redundant or unused expressions, inconsistent unit usage, and randomly generated identifiers. We develop a data acquisition pipeline that reconstructs high-quality, executable FeatureScript programs from Onshape’s internal representation. Figure 3a illustrates the pipeline. First, the sequence of modeling operations and their parameters are extracted. Then, implicit and platform-dependent parameterization is replaced with explicit arguments. For example, a line repre-sented by a point and a direction vector is replaced with a start-end point definition, as illustrated with purple brackets in part (1) of Fig. 3a. The units of parameters are stan-4Annotator            

> Prompt
> Few Shot
> Examples
> FeatureScript
> documentation
> Special
> Instructions Checklist
> Reviewer Annotator
> Draft Annotation Final Annotation FeatureScript
> Reviewer
> Prompt
> Qwen2 -VL
> Vision Encoder Tokenizer Tokenizer or
> Compiled Geometry
> Dimensions Multi -view Image
> Executable FeatureScript Code
> Generate a CAD model
> using FeatureScript
> framework. Mesh bounds
> from ( -48.64, -27.23, 0) to
> (48.64, 27.23, 74.93),
> center = (0, 0, 37.47),
> scale = 48.64
> Step 1 -Sketch
> Create a new sketch on
> the default Top plane.
> …
> Step 15 -Fillet
> Apply a fillet of radius
> 5.08
> ...
> Textual Description
> Explicit Sketch
> Parametrization
> Query
> Replacement
> Parameter
> Rounding
> Identifier
> Simplification Compilation Argument
> Cleaning
> Unit
> Scaling
> Input
> Success?
> FeatureScript
> Raw FeatureScript &
> Sketch Specification
> Yes No
> a
> b
> c…
> 1
> 2

Figure 3. Method overview. (a) We propose a FeatureScript reconstruction pipeline to create a large dataset of CAD models with advanced modeling operations. (b) Each model is annotated with a textual description using our two-stage annotation pipeline. (c) We finetune Qwen2-VL conditioned on text and image inputs to generate FeatureScript code that can be directly compiled into a B-rep model. 

dardized to millimeters (Fig. 3a, 1, yellow). Numeric ex-pressions are resolved, and precision is standardized to two decimal places (Fig. 3a, 1, magenta). Dummy queries are replaced with meaningful alternatives (Fig. 3a, 2, orange). Random entity and variable names, which impede interpreta-tion by LLMs, are replaced with compact, ordered identifiers (Fig. 3a, 2, grey). Definitions of geometric operations are simplified and normalized (Fig. 3a, 2, blue). Redundant operations and sketch entities that have no influence on the resulting geometry are removed. Finally, each program is validated by checking that the code reproduces the original model. Programs that fail validation are discarded (about 15%). We focus on 15 commonly used modeling operations, in-cluding sketch, extrude, revolve, sweep, loft, fillet, chamfer, shell, hole, boolean operations, patterns, etc ., discussed in Sec. 10. Unlike prior datasets restricted to sketch and ex-trude operations, this operation set covers the full modeling workflow, from initial geometry definition to refinement and reuse, mirroring real mechanical design practice. Applying our pipeline to these 15 modeling operations, we collect a dataset of 451k CAD designs with design histo-ries represented as concise, executable FeatureScript code. Executing each program in Onshape reproduces the original real-world design, preserving full geometric and parametric fidelity. This dataset forms the foundation for training LLM-based generative models capable of producing complex and editable CAD designs. To maximize compatibility with prior work, we construct our dataset from source CAD designs that form a subset of the collection underlying the ABC dataset [ 18 ] and a superset of the collection used by the DeepCAD [ 36 ] and Text2CAD [ 33 ] datasets. This overlap enables direct compar-ison of generative methods across representations on shared geometry and supports gradual migration from earlier token-based or Python-based datasets to FeatureScript. 

3.3. Annotation with natural language descriptions 

Generating CAD models from natural language descriptions enables intuitive, high-level specification of design intent. However, accurate text-to-CAD generation requires clear, unambiguous descriptions of the construction steps. Pub-lic CAD model repositories do not provide textual descrip-tions, while manual annotation is infeasible at scale. Prior works [ 16 , 40 ] therefore generate descriptions automatically from programmatic CAD representations using LLMs. We adopt this strategy for our FeatureScript-based representa-tion, which supports more accurate descriptions thanks to the structured and semantically rich nature of the code. Figure 3b illustrates our annotation pipeline. We build it around two LLMs, an Annotator and a Reviewer , whose roles are defined by system prompts (see in Sec. 11.1). Given an input CAD model represented as FeatureScript code, the Annotator produces an initial draft description. It receives the source code and few-shot examples and produces a struc-tured summary of the construction process. The Reviewer re-fines this draft and ensures consistency with the original code. It checks the correctness of the operation sequence, resolves ambiguities, corrects terminology, and verifies numerical parameters. Both models also receive FeatureScript docu-mentation, along with interpretation guidelines and rules for phrasing and structuring the final output. Using our FeatureScript code representation as the basis for annotation significantly simplifies the process. The code expresses modeling operations, parameters, and dependen-cies explicitly, making the construction sequence inherently interpretable. This reduces the risk of missing or misrepre-senting operations and helps maintain alignment between the textual description and the actual design logic. Adding documentation into the prompt helps the mod-5Table 2. Comparison of different frameworks in text-conditioned generation (top) and reconstruction from multi-view images (bottom). The models are trained with different representations of design history (Repr.), different text annotations (Annot.), and different CAD collections, where D denotes DeepCAD, R denotes CAD-Recode, and the number of modeling operations is shown in parentheses. The DeepCAD test set includes only sketch and extrude operations, while Our test set includes 15 different operations. Text2CAD annotations (T2C) are not available for the new designs, so baselines trained on these annotations cannot be evaluated for text-conditioned generation on the new test set. The best and second-best results for each task are shown in bold and underlined, respectively. Model Repr. Annot. Train data Input DeepCAD test set (sketch, extrude) Our test set (15 operations) CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ Text2CAD tkn T2C D (2) txt 6.97 60.3 82.6 11.20 76.0 0.78 8 — — — — — — —Cadrille Py T2C R+D (2) txt 0.10 22.5 97.6 9.60 79.5 0.82 3 — — — — — — —Ours FS Ours Ours (15) txt 0.06 8.2 98.9 8.10 84.8 0.58 9 0.07 8.5 98.7 9.20 81.0 0.92 19 Cadrille Py T2C R+D (2) img 0.20 14.3 96.9 8.82 81.8 0.82 6 3.26 38.5 85.0 11.58 76.9 1.02 14                   

> Ours FS Ours Ours (15) img 0.11 11.5 98.4 8.60 83.9 0.63 12 0.35 15.8 96.1 10.40 77.8 0.98 29

els interpret operations that depend on geometric context. Without it, LLMs easily misidentify reference entities ( e.g ., confusing interior and exterior contours or referencing incor-rect edges or faces). Providing documentation reduces such errors and leads to clearer and more precise descriptions. The two-agent design improves accuracy and reliability. The Annotator ensures global completeness and coherence, while the Reviewer focuses on correctness and detail. This division reduces failure modes common in single-agent gen-eration, such as operation omissions, incorrect naming, or inadvertent leakage of code into the text. Few-shot examples improve consistency in style and structure across the dataset. Together, these components yield accurate, interpretable, and well-structured textual descriptions. Experiments show that training LLMs on our descriptions improves text-to-CAD generation performance, producing CAD models that match the design intent more precisely. We additionally com-pare our descriptions to those from prior work in Sec. 11.3. 

3.4. Learning FeatureScript code generation 

We aim to enhance existing vision-language models for CAD generation. To this end, we adopt Qwen-VL [ 32 ] to generate design histories in the new representation conditioned on text descriptions or multi-view images (Fig. 3c). Previous methods normalize CAD models to be zero-centered with a fixed scale for ease of generation. In contrast, we train the model to generate designs in the natural dimensions specified by engineers. To do so, we provide the model with the center of the design’s bounding box and its extent through the text prompt for both text-conditioned and image-conditioned generation. In Sec. 6.4, we show that providing these parameters improves generation accuracy in the new representation. 

## 4. Experiments 

We evaluate our generative CAD framework by comparing a Qwen2-VL-2B model [ 32 ] trained with our new representa-tion against state-of-the-art approaches for text-conditioned generation and reconstruction from multi-view images. We further perform ablations to assess the contributions of the proposed design-history representation, the extended set of modeling operations, and the improved textual annotations. 

4.1. Experimental setup 

Implementation details. We perform supervised fine-tuning of Qwen2-VL-2B in two stages. First, we fine-tune the model on ~170k designs containing only sketch and extrude operations, corresponding to the DeepCAD dataset [ 36 ]. This stage establishes core geometric reasoning. We then fine-tune the model on ~405k designs from our full dataset, enabling generalization to all 15 modeling operations. In both stages, the model is conditioned either on textual de-scriptions or a  2 × 2 grid of multi-view images, following Cadrille [19]. We provide more details in Sec. 9. 

Baselines. We compare against two leading frame-works: generation of tokenized sequences and generation of Python code, represented by Text2CAD and Cadrille. Text2CAD [ 16 ] generates tokenized CAD sequences of sketch and extrude operations conditioned on text. It trains a 360M-parameter transformer using text annotations at four abstraction levels over the 170k DeepCAD designs. Cadrille [ 19 ] generates CADQuery-based Python design histories from text, multi-view images, or point clouds. It fine-tunes Qwen2-VL-2B via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) followed by reinforcement learning. We compare our SFT model against the SFT version of Cadrille, trained on a mixture of DeepCAD designs and synthetic designs from CAD-Recode [ 31 ], for a total of  1.17 M training examples. We additionally compare against a mesh generation method TRELLIS [38] in Sec. 7.3. 

Data. We compare the models on two test sets. To assess performance on designs constructed from sketch and extrude operations, we use the 7278 designs from the DeepCAD test 6GT CADFS (Ours) Cadrille Text2CAD Figure 4. Qualitative comparison in text-conditioned CAD model generation on the DeepCAD test set. 

set that have Text2CAD, CADQuery, and FeatureScript an-notations available simultaneously. To evaluate performance on the full set of modeling operations, we sample ~9k de-signs from our new dataset, covering all 15 operations. The new test set is sampled such that, when combined with the DeepCAD test set, the distribution of operations matches that of the subset of ABC [ 18 ] that contains designs express-ible with our 15 operations. We additionally compare the methods on the CADParser dataset [48] in Sec. 7.2. For text-conditioned generation, both baselines rely on Text2CAD textual annotations. We evaluate each method with the annotations used in its training. For multi-view reconstruction, we train and test all methods with a per-view resolution of  256 × 256 . We render the input images from the original Onshape geometry and also use this geometry as the reference for metrics. 

Metrics. Following prior work on CAD design-history gen-eration [ 16 , 19 , 21 , 31 , 36 ], we evaluate geometric accuracy and diversity. For geometric accuracy, we compute Chamfer Distance (CD), Edge Chamfer Distance (ECD), and Normal Consistency (NC) between generated and reference CAD models. To assess the fidelity of the geometric distribution, we use Minimal Matching Distance (MMD). We measure GT CADFS (Ours) Cadrille Input images 

> Figure 5. Qualitative comparison in multi-view CAD reconstruc-tion. Rows 1–2 show results on the DeepCAD test set, and rows 3–6 show results on our test set.

the diversity using Coverage (COV) and Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD). We also report the Invalidity Ratio (IR), which measures the fraction of generated designs that fail to construct. We additionally report topology validity metrics in Sec. 7.1. We provide full metric definitions in Sec. 12. 

4.2. Comparison against other frameworks 

Table 2 shows the quantitative comparison of the frame-works, Figs. 4 and 5 show the qualitative comparisons in text-conditioned generation and multi-view reconstruction respectively. Our model substantially outperforms the models based on prior frameworks on both text-conditioned generation and multi-view reconstruction. On the DeepCAD test set (sketch and extrude only), it achieves markedly higher geometric accuracy and diversity than Text2CAD and Cadrille. In text-conditioned generation, it improves CD and ECD by 40% and 64% over Cadrille, while also achieving better MMD, COV, and JSD. The Invalidity Ratio is comparable to Text2CAD and slightly worse than Cadrille, likely due to the lack of FeatureScript code in the VLM pretraining data compared to Python. 7Table 3. Ablation study of our framework in text-conditioned generation (top) and reconstruction from multi-view images (bottom). We evaluate the individual contributions of the new representation (Repr.), the new text annotations (Annot.), and training on the new modeling operations (D denotes DeepCAD, R denotes CAD-Recode, and the number of modeling operations is shown in parentheses). The DeepCAD test set includes only sketch and extrude operations, while Our test set includes 15 different operations. Text2CAD annotations (T2C) are not available for the new designs, so models trained on these annotations cannot be evaluated for text-conditioned generation on the new test set. The best and second-best results for each task are shown in bold and underlined, respectively. Model Repr. Annot. Train data Input DeepCAD test set (sketch, extrude) Our test set (15 operations) CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ Cadrille Py T2C R+D (2) txt 0.10 22.5 97.6 9.60 79.5 0.82 3 — — — — — — —(a) FS T2C D (2) txt 0.40 24.4 95.3 9.80 79.7 0.73 15 — — — — — — —(b) FS Ours D (2) txt 0.06 8.5 98.9 8.10 84.9 0.59 10 14.50 75.3 75.4 12.80 70.8 3.70 44 (c) Ours FS Ours Ours (15) txt 0.06 8.2 98.9 8.10 84.8 0.58 9 0.07 8.5 98.7 9.20 81.0 0.92 19                                                    

> Cadrille Py R+D (2) img 0.20 14.3 96.9 8.82 81.8 0.82 63.26 38.5 85.0 11.58 76.9 1.02 14
> (d) FS D (2) img 0.14 17.8 97.9 8.90 82.9 0.60 98.69 55.6 80.0 13.00 74.5 1.30 22 (e) Ours FS Ours (15) img 0.11 11.5 98.4 8.60 83.9 0.63 12 0.35 15.8 96.1 10.40 77.8 0.98 29

On the new test set with the extended set of modeling operations, our model surpasses Cadrille in multi-view re-construction in both accuracy and diversity. Both models perform worse than in text-conditioned generation, high-lighting the difficulty of design history reconstruction from images alone. The baselines cannot be evaluated for text-conditioned generation on the new test set, as Text2CAD annotations are unavailable for the new designs. Comparing our model across the two test sets shows that it generalizes well: the geometric accuracy remains consistent, while the diversity and validity exhibit a small drop attributable to the higher complexity and variability of the designs with the extended operation set. Overall, our framework enables the generation of substantially more complex and dependency-rich CAD designs than prior frameworks. 

4.3. Ablation study 

Table 3 shows the evaluation of contributions of individ-ual components of our framework: the FeatureScript rep-resentation, the extended modeling operation set, and the representation-aligned textual annotations. Comparing Python-based Cadrille with the FeatureScript-based models (a) and (d) isolates the effect of the repre-sentation (note that all three models are based on Qwen2-VL-2B). Using FeatureScript with the DeepCAD training set and Text2CAD annotations yields performance on par with Cadrille despite its significantly larger training corpus. This shows that FeatureScript is a viable alternative to the Python-based representation. At the same time, using Fea-tureScript allows us to scale training to complex real-world designs with a broad range of modeling operations, which yields a substantial performance improvement, as shown by comparing models (a) and (c) or (d) and (e). Comparing models (a) and (b) isolates the effect of the new textual annotations. The new annotations provide clear gains in geometric accuracy and diversity, highlighting the importance of annotations aligned with the underlying design-history representation. We provide additional abla-tion results in Sec. 6. 

## 5. Conclusions 

We introduced CADFS, a data-centric framework that en-ables large vision-language models to generate complex CAD design histories spanning a broad range of model-ing operations. By leveraging a new FeatureScript-based representation, a large-scale dataset of 450k real-world de-signs, and representation-aligned textual annotations, our approach overcomes the limitations of prior tokenized and Python-based CAD workflows. A VLM trained within this framework achieves state-of-the-art performance in both text-conditioned generation and multi-view reconstruction, producing more accurate, diverse, and feature-rich CAD models than prior methods. Our abla-tions confirm that each component of the framework — the representation, the extended operation set, and the textual annotations — contributes substantially to these gains. Our FeatureScript reconstruction pipeline can be used directly to scale the dataset to newly added designs in the Onshape library. Overall, CADFS significantly broadens the complexity and fidelity achievable in generative CAD, opening the door to models capable of producing realistic, editable designs aligned with real engineering practice. 

Acknowledgments. We are grateful to Onshape for pro-viding public access to a vast library of CAD designs. The presented results were obtained with the use of the super-computer Zhores [ 46 ]. The work was supported by the grant for research centers in the field of AI provided by the Min-istry of Economic Development of the Russian Federation in accordance with the agreement 000000C313925P4F0002 and the agreement №139-10-2025-033. 8CADFS: A Big CAD Program Dataset and Framework for Computer-Aided Design with Large Language Models 

# Supplementary Material 

In Sec. 6, we present additional ablation studies on key design choices in our framework, including (1) the choice of the base VLM used for fine-tuning, (2) the contribution of individual components of our FeatureScript-based rep-resentation, (3) the effect of combining the design history representation with appropriate textual annotations, (4) the effect of providing the model with explicit design dimen-sions during generation, and (5) the impact of input image resolution on reconstruction quality for models involving the newly introduced operations. In Sec. 7, we report evaluation with additional metrics, on additional data, and an additional comparison with a mesh-based approach. In Sec. 8, we discuss failure cases of our model. In Sec. 9, we provide implementation details. In Sec. 10, we discuss our choice of modeling operations. In Sec. 11, we provide further details of our annotation procedure. In Sec. 12, we describe the evaluation details. 

## 6. Additional ablation studies 

6.1. Choice of base model 

In our main experiments, we use the Qwen2-VL-2B model [ 32 ]. Here, we compare it with the larger Qwen3-8B variant [ 44 ] on text-conditioned generation using the DeepCAD test subset. As shown in Tab. 4, the 2B model performs on par with the 8B model, while requiring roughly half the training time. These results indicate that Qwen2-VL-2B achieves a strong balance between computational efficiency and generation accuracy. 

6.2. FeatureScript representation 

The Onshape platform does not directly provide clean, ex-ecutable FeatureScript code. We reconstruct high-quality FeatureScript programs from Onshape’s internal representa-tion using our data acquisition pipeline. Table 5 reports an ablation over progressively refined variants of this represen-tation. In these experiments, we train and test Qwen3 -8B for text-conditioned generation on the DeepCAD subsets. We begin with minimally processed executable code ex-tracted from the internal Onshape representation paired with abstract Text2CAD [ 16 ] annotations (a). This baseline yields low generation accuracy, indicating that the raw Onshape representation is insufficient for precise generation. As the first refinement, we replace the arbitrary identifiers of geometric entities (edges, faces, bodies) with compact deterministic ones ( e.g ., “F0”, “E0”, “E1” in Fig. 2) (b). This improves geometric accuracy (Chamfer Distance) and                       

> Table 4. Comparison of LLMs of different size trained for text-conditioned CAD generation based on our framework. The best
> result is shown in bold text. Base model CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓
> Qwen2-VL-2B 0.06 8.5 98.9 8.10 84.9 0.59 10 Qwen3-8B 0.06 7.8 98.9 8.04 85.0 0.60 8

diversity (COV) by 22% and 13% , respectively. Next, we train a model on expert Text2CAD annota-tions (c), which substantially improves performance across all metrics. However, this also doubles the Invalidity Ra-tio. This suggests that the detailed expert descriptions from Text2CAD are misaligned with the entangled internal On-shape representation of CAD models. To address this, we replace implicit definitions of sketch elements with explicit ones (d), e.g ., representing line seg-ments by their endpoints rather than by an origin point and direction. This significantly reduces the Invalidity Ratio from 24% to 10% while maintaining accuracy and diversity. We further disentangle the representation by simplifying modeling operations (e), yielding an additional 21% reduc-tion in Chamfer Distance. With the FeatureScript code now concise and inter-pretable, we generate our own textual annotations tailored to this representation and describing the CAD models more precisely (f). This key alignment between representation and annotations produces a 60% reduction in Chamfer Distance and improvements across other metrics as well. Finally, we standardize numerical precision to two dec-imal places (g). While this has only a minor impact on performance, it reduces code length and improves consis-tency. 

6.3. Different combinations of representations and annotations 

Table 6 shows an additional evaluation of the contributions of our FeatureScript representation and our new textual an-notations. We compare models trained with our standardized FeatureScript representation paired with different annota-tions: (a) T2C short annotations, (b) T2C expert annotations, and (e) ours. We also compare models trained with our annotations paired with different design history representa-tions: (c) Python code, (d) the minimally processed “raw” FeatureScript, and (e) the standardized FeatureScript. In these experiments, we train and test Qwen2-VL-2B on the DeepCAD subsets. 9Table 5. Ablation study of our FeatureScript-based representation. We compare text-conditioned models trained using progressively refined variants of this representation. The best and second best results are shown in bold text and underlined respectively. Annotations Stable identifiers Explicit paramerization Simplified operations Precision normalization Median Mean MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ CD↓ ECD↓ (a) T2C short 124.87 318.1 49.3 190.8 452.1 13.26 58.6 3.44 14 (b) T2C short ✓ 97.82 272.8 52.4 164.2 399.9 12.40 66.2 1.74 12 (c) T2C expert ✓ 0.18 23.0 96.9 23.2 88.9 10.06 77.8 0.79 24 (d) T2C expert ✓ ✓ 0.19 22.5 96.9 21.3 81.1 9.29 81.9 0.66 10 (e) T2C expert ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.15 19.8 97.7 20.4 78.2 9.08 82.2 0.64 9(f) Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.06 7.9 98.9 7.7 46.8 7.89 85.8 0.59 8(g) Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.06 7.8 98.9 7.2 45.0 8.04 85.0 0.60 8

Table 6. Comparison of different combinations of representations and annotations. Representation Annotations CD↓ COV↑ IR↓ (a) Standardized FeatureScript T2C short 84.87 24.0 5                  

> (b) Standardized FeatureScript T2C expert 0.40 79.7 15 (c) Python code Ours 1.93 48.5 4
> (d) Raw FeatureScript Ours 0.05 30.6 56 (e) Standardized FeatureScript Ours 0.06 84.9 10

Only pairing the standardized FeatureScript with our an-notations (e) simultaneously achieves low geometric error (CD), high diversity (COV), and a low invalid generation rate (IR). Pairing FeatureScript with the Text2CAD annotations (a,b), or our annotations with Python (c) leads to significantly higher geometric error. This is because these annotations describe the design process in substantially different repre-sentations. The Text2CAD annotations and Python scripts are derived from the DeepCAD command sequence, while our annotations are derived from FeatureScript code. For example, in DeepCAD, sketches are created in a normalized coordinate frame and then scaled and translated, whereas in FeatureScript everything is modeled directly in a global coordinate frame. Training on raw FeatureScript, even with our annotations (d), results in a high fraction of invalid outputs (IR) due to the high degree of entanglement in the raw FeatureScript. 

6.4. Scale-aware multi-view reconstruction of CAD 

Generating CAD design histories as code naturally enables models to operate directly in the physical units used by engineers. Prior code-based frameworks, however, inherit normalized coordinate systems from token-sequence repre-sentations, preventing generation at real-world scales. In contrast, our CAD programs preserve each design’s original dimensions, allowing models to learn and generate geometry at true scale. Our text annotations follow the same principle and specify all measurements in native units. In this context, reconstruction from multi-view images presents an additional challenge: absolute scale cannot be 

Table 7. Comparison of multi-view CAD reconstruction models trained with and without additional information about the bounding box dimensions of the design. The best result is shown in bold text. Bounding box CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓               

> Not specified 0.58 23.9 94.3 9.90 79.5 0.64 14 Specified 0.14 17.8 97.9 8.90 82.9 0.60 9

reliably inferred from visual input alone. To mitigate this, we provide the VLM with the bounding-box dimensions and position of each design as part of the textual prompt (e.g ., “Generate a CAD model using FeatureScript frame-work. Bounds from (-114.66, -69.35, -31.78) to (68.33, 76.26, 50.8), center = (-23.17, 3.45, 9.51), scale = 91.5” ). Table 7 compares models trained with and without this scale information on the DeepCAD test set. Supplying the bounding-box parameters significantly improves geometric accuracy: for example, improves Chamfer Distance by 76% 

and reduces the Invalidity Ratio by 36% .

6.5. Image resolution 

We additionally examine the effect of input image resolution on CAD reconstruction quality. Table 8 compares a model trained with a per-view resolution of  256 × 256  against one trained with  128 × 128 . We evaluate both on the DeepCAD test set and on our new test set containing the full set of modeling operations. On the DeepCAD test set, which consists primarily of simple sketch-and-extrude geometry, the gains from higher resolution are modest. In contrast, on our test set featuring more complex geometric structures, the benefits are substan-tially larger. Overall, doubling the input resolution yields roughly a  2× improvement in Chamfer Distance and a 23% 

improvement in Edge Chamfer Distance. These results fur-ther highlight that models trained on richer, multi-operation CAD data are better positioned to leverage higher-fidelity visual input, reflecting the greater geometric diversity and complexity of our new data. 10 Table 8. Comparison of multi-view CAD reconstruction models trained with different per-view image resoluton. The best result is shown in bold text. Per-view resolution DeepCAD test set (sketch, extrude) Our test set (15 operations)                                          

> CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓
> 128×128 0.12 13.7 98.2 8.66 83.5 0.63 11 0.62 20.5 94.5 10.67 77.3 1.02 26
> 256×256 0.11 11.5 98.4 8.60 83.9 0.63 12 0.35 15.8 96.1 10.40 77.8 0.98 29

Table 9. Additional comparison of our framework with a Python code-based Cadrille in text-conditioned generation (left) and multi-view reconstruction (center and right) on topology validity metrics. The best result is shown in bold text. Model Text input, DeepCAD test set Img input, DeepCAD test set Img input, Our test set (15 operations)                                    

> SegE↓ DangEL↓ SIR↓ FluxEE↓ SegE↓ DangEL↓ SIR↓ FluxEE↓ SegE↓ DangEL↓ SIR↓ FluxEE↓
> Cadrille 0.38 0.3 0.51 0.21 0.36 0.3 0.25 0.45 3.50 0.8 0.51 0.92 Ours 0.16 0.1 0.48 0.21 0.27 0.1 0.83 0.35 1.35 1.2 1.10 0.80

## 7. Additional comparisons 

7.1. Additional metrics 

Table 9 reports additional topology validity metrics from [ 40 ,Sec. 6.1.4]: Segment Error (SegE), Dangling Edge Length (DangEL), Self-Intersection Ratio (SIR), and Flux Enclo-sure Error (FluxEE). Our model achieves high topological validity. 

7.2. Additional test data 

In Tab. 10, we compare our model with Cadrille in image-based reconstruction on the CADParser dataset [ 48 ], which features 5 operations: sketch, extrude, revolve, fillet, and chamfer. The dataset includes 40k designs obtained from an initial set of 6.8k base designs via augmentation. We test the models on a subset of 6.8k designs originating from different base designs. The results are consistent with those on the DeepCAD and CADFS test sets. Our model achieves significantly higher accuracy (CD, ECD) than Cadrille, with comparable diversity (COV, JSD). 

7.3. Comparison with mesh-based generation 

To show that CAD model generation requires specialized methods, we compare our framework against the polygo-nal mesh generation method TRELLIS [ 38 ] on the image-conditioned generation task. In this comparison, TRELLIS takes an isometric CAD image as input and generates a mesh, followed by postprocessing. Table 11 and Fig. 6 show the quantitative and qualitative results, respectively. The quantitative results show that our framework outperforms TRELLIS by a large margin. The visual results show that our CAD-specific approach generates precise geometry, while the mesh-based method produces non-watertight meshes, over-smoothed edges, disconnected geometric components, and noisy surfaces. 

Table 10. Additional comparison of our framework with a Python code-based Cadrille in multi-view reconstruction on the CADParser dataset (5 operations). The best result is shown in bold text. Model CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓               

> Cadrille 0.23 20.9 95.5 4.49 50.9 0.36 11
> Ours 0.13 12.7 97.4 4.94 48.1 0.37 19

## 8. Failure cases 

Figure 7 shows examples of failure cases for the model trained on our data. In both text- and image-conditioned modes, the model occasionally omits refinement operations such as fillets (a) or applies them to incorrect geometric enti-ties (b). It also occasionally produces inaccurate reconstruc-tions overall (c,d). In image-conditioned mode, the model often produces incorrect text (e), which we attribute to limi-tations of the Qwen-VL visual encoder. It also frequently re-sorts to lower-level operations, e.g ., multiple sketch-extrudes instead of a pattern. This is likely due to the prevalence of simple operations in Onshape designs. 

## 9. Implementation details 

We train our model in two stages. First, we fine-tune the model on ~170k designs containing only sketch and extrude operations, corresponding to the DeepCAD dataset [ 36 ]. This stage establishes core geometric reasoning. We then fine-tune the model on ~405k designs from our full dataset that remain after excluding the test splits and scripts longer than 8192 tokens. This enables generalization to all 15 mod-eling operations. In both stages, the model is conditioned either on textual descriptions or a  2 × 2 grid of multi-view images, following Cadrille [ 19 ]. In the first stage, we use images at a resolution of  128 × 128 . In the second stage, we increase the image resolution to 256 × 256 to improve geometric reasoning on complex structures, while keeping all other hyperparameters unchanged. At each stage, we train the model for 3 epochs with a batch size of 128, us-11 Table 11. Comparison of our CAD-specific method and a mesh-based method of reconstruction from multi-view images. The best result is shown in bold text. Method DeepCAD test set (sketch, extrude) Our test set (15 operations)                                          

> CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓ CD↓ ECD↓ NC↑ MMD↓ COV↑ JSD↓ IR↓
> Trellis 36.04 168.0 67.2 14.67 62.6 2.82 032.06 173.9 67.5 16.58 63.2 2.36 3
> Ours 0.11 11.5 98.4 8.60 83.9 0.63 12 0.35 15.8 96.1 10.40 77.8 0.98 29

GT CADFS Trellis 

Figure 6. Qualitative comparison of our CAD-specific method and a mesh-based method of reconstruction from multi-view images. 

ing the Adam-W optimizer [ 24 ] with an initial learning rate of 2e-4 , a linear warmup ratio of  0.05 , and a cosine decay schedule. Training on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with Deep-Speed [ 30 ], FlashAttention-2 [ 10 ], and Liger-Kernel [ 15 ]optimizations takes 30 and 76 hours for the first and second stages, respectively, using 24 GB of VRAM per GPU. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) GT Ours 

Figure 7. Examples of failure cases for the model trained on our data for text (a-c) and image input (d,e). 

## 10. Choice of modeling operations 

Sketch-based construction of primary solids. Sketch de-fines 2D profiles composed of lines, circles, arcs, ellipses, elliptical arcs, Bezier curves, splines, and text. This expands beyond prior datasets limited to lines, circles, and circular arcs. Sketches serve as the foundation for most solids. Ex-trude creates 3D solids by extending sketch profiles linearly, commonly used for prismatic parts and structural compo-nents. Unlike prior datasets, the FeatureScript representation enables extruding separate parts of a sketch. Revolve sweeps a sketch profile around an axis to create rotationally sym-metric solids ( e.g ., shafts, housings, knobs). Sweep moves a profile along a spatial curve to form tubing, wire guides, and ergonomic handles. Loft interpolates smoothly between mul-tiple profiles to create aerodynamic or freeform transitions. 

Construction plane defines reference planes used to position sketches, splits, and mirror operations. These operations create the core massing geometry of a part. 

Refinement and edge treatment. Fillet rounds sharp edges to reduce stress concentrations, improve manufacturability, and meet ergonomic requirements. Chamfer replaces edges with straight bevels for deburring, clearance, or assembly guidance. Both require selecting specific edges or faces from the evolving model. Their inclusion is enabled by FeatureScript’s geometric query mechanism. 

Solid modification and material removal. Shell hollows a solid part while maintaining structural walls. Hole cre-ates parametric holes with standardized diameters, coun-tersinks, and threads. Boolean union, subtract, intersect 

combine or remove solids to form complex assemblies or cutouts. Delete body removes construction intermediates or temporary helper geometry. These operations support both constructive and subtractive manipulation of solids. 12 Replication and spatial reuse. Circular pattern repeats fea-tures radially around an axis ( e.g ., bolt circles, gear spokes). 

Mirror produces symmetric geometry efficiently by reflect-ing features across planes. Transform applies rigid trans-lations and rotations to reposition or duplicate bodies or features. These operations capture the hierarchical, paramet-ric reuse patterns common in engineered components. 

## 11. Annotation details 

11.1. System prompts 

Figure 8 shows the system prompts for the Annotator and Reviewer LLMs. The Annotator is instructed to translate the code representation of a CAD model into a natural language description. The critical understanding section highlights the key characteristics of our FeatureScript repre-sentation, enabling the Annotator to develop a comprehen-sive understanding of the geometry expressed in the code and its construction process. The Reviewer is instructed to perform a thorough validation of the Annotator’s output. Both models also receive FeatureScript documentation and special instructions for phrasing and structuring the final output, illustrated in Fig. 9. 

11.2. Implementation details 

For both the Annotator and Reviewer LLMs, we use the gpt-oss-120B model [ 29 ] with the Medium thinking configu-ration, which provides a good trade-off between annotation quality and computational requirements. The annotation process for 450k CAD designs takes 7.5 days on 2 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. 

11.3. Comparison with Text2CAD annotations 

Similar to our work, Text2CAD automatically generates tex-tual descriptions from CAD representations using LLMs. However, Text2CAD operates on simplified tokenized se-quences derived from the original CAD data. This conver-sion inevitably discards structural and geometric information, leading to incomplete or inaccurate prompts. In contrast, we generate descriptions directly from the native CAD repre-sentation, enabling more faithful, detailed, and semantically aligned annotations. Figures 10 to 12 provide qualitative comparisons between our annotations and the expert Text2CAD annotations. For reference, we also show CAD designs generated by models trained on each type of annotation (both models predict Fea-tureScript code). Text2CAD annotations often omit parts of the geometry ( e.g ., in Fig. 10 only a subset of the sketch is extruded) or describe features imprecisely (Figs. 11 and 12), which leads to incomplete or inaccurate generation results. Our representation-aligned descriptions support more accu-rate and complete CAD model generation. 

## 12. Evaluation details 

In this section, we provide details of the quantitative evalua-tion of generated CAD designs. Unless otherwise stated, we compare generated and reference shapes by first sampling point clouds on their boundary surfaces. Let X = {xi}|X|

> i=1

and Y = {yj }|Y | 

> j=1

be point sets sampled from the generated and reference meshes, respectively, with xi, y j ∈ R3.

Chamfer Distance (CD) measures the geometric discrep-ancy between the generated and reference 3D models. It is defined as the symmetric average squared distance from each point in one cloud to its nearest neighbor in the other: 

dCD (X, Y ) = 1

|X|

X

> x∈X

min  

> y∈Y

∥x − y∥22

+ 1

|Y |

X

> y∈Y

min 

> x∈X

∥x − y∥22.

(1) Chamfer Distance simultaneously captures how well the generated shape covers the reference surface (recall) and how close it stays to it (precision). We report the median Chamfer Distance across the dataset relative to the size of the CAD model, scaled by 10 3 for convenience. 

Edge Chamfer Distance (ECD) computes the Chamfer Dis-tance according to Eq. (1), but restricts it to points XE ⊂ X

and Y E ⊂ Y near the edges of the generated and reference meshes. It assesses the fidelity of sharp geometric features which are important in industrial design. To detect edge points, we use a local vicinity test. For each point, we query all neighbors within a radius of r = 0 .004 (in normalized unit-scale space) using a ball query over the point cloud. A point is classified as an edge if any neighbor within this vicinity exhibits a sufficiently different normal, i.e., when the absolute dot product satisfies |n⊤ 

> i

nj | < 0.2. We report the median Edge Chamfer Distance across the dataset relative to the size of the CAD model, scaled by 10 3.

Normal Consistency (NC) evaluates the consistency of the orientations of the generated and reference 3D surfaces. For each x ∈ X we denote by yx ∈ Y its nearest neighbor, and similarly xy for y ∈ Y . Let nx and ny be unit normals at points x and y. Normal Consistency is then defined as 

NC( X, Y ) = 12

 1

> |X|

X

> x∈X

nx · nyx

+ 1 

> |Y|

X

> y∈Y

ny · nxy



,

(2) where the averages are taken over the sampled points. Val-ues close to 1 indicate that the corresponding surfaces are oriented consistently. We report the median Normal Consis-tency across the dataset. To compute CD, ECD, and NC, we sample 100k points from the reference and generated point clouds. 13 Coverage (COV) assesses how well the set of generated shapes G covers the set of reference shapes S. For each 

X ∈ G, we denote by NN S (X) its nearest neighbor in S

according to dCD . The Coverage is the fraction of reference shapes that are matched at least once: 

COV( S, G ) = 1

|S| {NN S (X) : X ∈ G} . (3) Higher Coverage indicates that generated samples cover a larger portion of the reference shape space. We report Coverage as a percentage. 

Minimal Matching Distance (MMD) measures how well the distribution of generated shapes approximates the refer-ence distribution. For each reference shape Y ∈ S we com-pute the Chamfer Distance to its nearest generated neighbor in G and average: 

MMD( S, G ) = 1

|S|

X 

> Y∈S

min  

> X∈G

dCD (X, Y ). (4) Lower Minimal Matching Distance means that, on average, every reference shape is well approximated by some gener-ated shape. We report Minimal Matching Distance as the mean squared Euclidean distance on unit-normalized shapes scaled by 10 3.

Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) is a statistical measure of similarity between probability distributions. Here, it quan-tifies how similar the spatial point distributions of the refer-ence shapes S and the generated shapes G are. To compute Jensen-Shannon Divergence, the 3D space is discretized into a regular voxel grid, and each point in the sets is assigned to an i-th voxel, yielding empirical distributions PS and 

PG over voxels. The Jensen-Shannon Divergence is then calculated as 

JSD( PS , P G) = 12 DKL (PS ∥M )+ 12 DKL (PG∥M ), (5) where M = 12 (PS + PG) and 

DKL (P ∥Q) = X

> i

P (i) log P (i)

Q(i) . (6) Smaller Jensen-Shannon Divergence indicates closer agree-ment between the distributions of reference and generated geometry. We report Jensen-Shannon Divergence scaled by 

10 2.Following DeepCAD [ 36 ], we randomly sample 3k shapes from each of the reference and generated sets, re-peat this evaluation process 10 times, and report average scores for the COV, MMD, and JSD metrics. We sample 2k points from the reference and generated point clouds to compute these three metrics. 

Invalidity Ratio (IR) is the fraction of design histories that fail to construct into a valid solid ( e.g ., due to CAD kernel errors or invalid geometry or topology). Let Ngen be the total number of generated sequences and Ninv the number of sequences failed to construct. The Invalidity Ratio is defined as 

IR = Ninv 

Ngen 

∗ 100% . (7) Lower Invalidity Ratio indicates that the model produces compilable CAD programs more reliably. We report IR as a percentage. 14 Annotator Prompt 

You are an expert CAD engineer and FeatureScript interpreter. Your job is to translate FeatureScript code into clear, actionable CAD modeling instructions. 

<task> Analyze the provided FeatureScript code and write step-by-step CAD modeling instructions that would recreate the exact same 3D model. Focus on understanding: 

• Sketch operations: what geometric elements are being drawn and their parameters. 

• Query selections: which regions/faces are being selected for operations (pay attention to disambiguation data). 

• 3D operations: extrusions, cuts, patterns and their parameters. 

• Operation sequence: the exact order of operations must be performed. 

• Do NOT use internal FeatureScript variable names (e.g., "E0.middle", "F1", "sketch1", "edge E6", "E8.trimOffspring ") 

• Change the internal FeatureScript variable names to generic names (e.g., "E0.middle" to "a plane"). 

• Do NOT link or mention the script in the output. </task> <critical_understanding> 

• newSketch() creates a new sketch on a specified plane. 

• skCircle(), skLineSegment(), etc. add geometry to the sketch. 

• skSolve() finalizes the sketch. 

• extrude() operations work on the selected regions 

• ... <critical_understanding> Reviewer Prompt 

You are an expert CAD engineer reviewing step-by-step modeling instructions. Your job is to verify accuracy and fix errors. 

<task> Review the provided annotation against the FeatureScript code. Check for: 1. Accuracy: Do the steps match what the code actually does? 2. Completeness: Are all operations from the code represented? 3. Clarity: Are the instructions clear and unambiguous? 4. Technical correctness: Are parameters, dimensions, and selections correct? Pay special attention to: 

• Which sketch regions are actually being selected for extrusions. 

• Whether the order of operations matches the code. 

• Proper understanding of imprint faces and region selections. 

• Correctness of numeric values and units. 

• FeatureScript variable names (e.g., "E2", "E0.middle", "F1", "sketch1", "edge E6", "E8.trimOffspring", "THROUGH_ALL", ) are NOT in the output. </task> <verification_checklist> 

• Cross-check every numeric value against the FeatureScript. 

• Verify sketch plane selections match qCreatedBy() calls. 

• Confirm extrusion selections match makeQuery() with disambiguation data. 

• Check that geometry descriptions match actual sketch elements. 

• Extrude operations work on the selected regions. 

• Ensure step count matches actual operations in code. 

• Ensure NO link or mention the script in the output. 

• Ensure internal FeatureScript variable names (e.g., "E0.middle", "F1", "sketch1", "edge E6", "E8.trimOffspring", "THROUGH_ALL") are NOT in the output. 

• Parameters from the InitialGuess section are mentioned when describing the text placement but not the InitialGuess section itself. No "as defined in the code" in the output. </verification_checklist> <documentation> ... </> <special_instructions> ... </> <few_shot_examples> ... </> <documentation> ... </> <special_instructions> ... </> Output only the corrected final annotation following the format requirements exactly. Figure 8. System prompts for the Annotator and Reviewer LLMs. 

15 Documentation 

## extrude 

extrude (context is Context, id is Id, definition is map) Create an extrude, as used in Onshape's extrude feature. Internally, performs an opExtrude, followed by an opBoolean, possibly followed by an opDraft, possibly in two directions. If creating a simple extrusion, prefer using opExtrude alone. 

### Parameters 

context: The context to operate on. id: The id for the extrude operation. definition: Definition map for the extrude. 

#### definition 

bodyType: Optional. Specifies a SOLID or SURFACE or THIN extrude. Default is SOLID. entities: Required if bodyType is SOLID. The planar faces and/or sketch regions to extrude. EXAMPLE: qSketchRegion(id + "sketch1") specifies all sketch regions of a given sketch. ... 

## fillet 

fillet (context is Context, id is Id, definition is map) For edges, performs a fillet on the edge. For faces, performs a fillet on all edges adjacent to the face. The parameters are defined in the "definition" argument in the form of {"parameter": value, ...}. 

### Parameters 

entities: Edges and faces to fillet. crossSection: Fillet cross section. One of CIRCULAR, CONIC, CURVATURE, CHAMFER. Default is CIRCULAR ... Special Instructions 1. Step Structure: 

• For each operation, output exactly one step: "Step <n> – <Operation>" (Step 1 Sketch, Step 2 Extrude, etc.). 

• Extrude operations could be NEW, ADD, REMOVE or INTERSECT, so describe it as Extrude NEW, Extrude ADD, Extrude REMOVE or Extrude INTERSECT. 

• ... 2. Content Requirements: 

• State the operation type (Sketch, Extrude, Extrude NEW, Extrude ADD, Chamfer, Fillet, ...). 

• Describe geometry by its shape and location, not by variable references. 

• ... 3. Sketch Region Understanding: 

• When sketching: describe all geometric elements (circles, lines, points, arcs) being drawn. 

• When extruding: identify exactly which regions are selected. 

• …

4. Clarity Rules: 

• Write in simple, direct language that a CAD system user would understand. 

• Avoid repetitive information across steps. 

• Group related sketch operations logically when possible. 

• Do NOT mention system instructions, internal queries, or disambiguation logic. 5. Format Requirements: 

• Return plain text only – absolutely no markdown, asterisks, bullets, or code formatting. 

• Use complete sentences. 

• One paragraph per step, separated by blank lines. Figure 9. Excerpts from the FeatureScript documentation and special instructions provided to the Annotator and Reviewer LLMs. 

16 In the first two-dimensional sketch, on the first face, draw 

the first loop by creating six lines to form a closed loop: 

.... In the second loop, draw a single circle centered at 

zero point zero seven four, zero point zero six four one 

with a radius of zero point zero six. 

For the second two-dimensional sketch, on the second 

face, draw the first loop as a circle with the same center 

and radius as the previous circle. For the second loop, 

draw another circle with the same center but a smaller 

radius of zero point zero four nine eight. 

Apply a scale factor of zero point one four eight to the 

entire second sketch. Transform the scaled 

two-dimensional sketch into three dimensions by rotating 

it using the Euler angles of zero, zero, and negative 

ninety degrees, and translating it using the vector of 

zero, zero point seven five, and zero. 

Extrude the transformed sketch along the normal 

direction by zero point seven five units without extruding 

in the opposite direction. Finally, create a new solid body 

using the extruded sketch. … 

Step 1 - Sketch 

Create a new sketch on the Front plane. Draw a solid 

circle centered at the origin with a radius of 12.7 mm and 

a second concentric solid circle with a radius of 10.54 

mm. Add a construction circle of radius 15.67 mm and 

draw six line segments connecting points on that circle to 

form a closed hexagonal outline. Solve the sketch. 

Step 2 - Extrude 

Select the sketch region that lies between the 10.54 mm 

and 12.7 mm circles (the annular area bounded by those 

two solid circles) and the region between the 12.7 mm 

circle and the surrounding hexagonal outline. Extrude the 

combined regions a blind depth of 158.75 mm to produce 

a single solid body; the innermost 10.54 mm circle 

remains a void. 

Generated with Text2CAD annotation Generated with our annotation 

Text2CAD annotation Our annotation Figure 10. Comparison of the expert Text2CAD textual annotation (left) and our annotation (right) for the CAD model shown at the top. The CAD designs generated by models trained on each type of annotation are shown at the bottom. The Text2CAD annotation only describes extrusion of the second sketch with the circles (highlighted in orange) and forgets the first sketch with the hexagon. Our annotation describes the extrusion region correctly (highlighted in blue), supporting more accurate and complete CAD model generation. 

17 Create a new coordinate system by setting the Euler 

angles to [0.0, 0.0, -90.0] and the translation vector to 

[0.0, 0.3675, 0.0]. For the first face, draw a loop starting 

at the origin (0.0, 0.0) and create a series of lines: from 

(0.0, 0.0) to (0.105, 0.0), then to (0.105, 0.495), to 

(0.105, 0.6), to (0.105, 0.75), to (0.0, 0.75), and finally 

back to (0.0, 0.0). For the second face, draw another 

loop starting at (0.105, 0.495) and create lines to (0.6, 

0.495), to (0.6, 0.6), to (0.105, 0.6), and back to (0.105, 

0.495). For the third face, draw a loop starting at (0.6, 

0.0) and create lines to (0.6, 0.495), to (0.6, 0.6), to 

(0.705, 0.6), to (0.705, 0.0), and back to (0.6, 0.0). Scale 

the entire two-dimensional sketch by a factor of 0.75. 

Rotate the scaled sketch using the Euler angles [0.0, 0.0, 

-90.0] and translate it using the vector [0.0, 0.3675, 0.0]. 

Extrude the two-dimensional sketch 0.3675 units in the 

direction of the normal without extruding in the opposite 

direction. Create a new solid body from this part. The 

final dimensions of the rectangular prism are length 

0.705, width 0.75, and height 0.3675. 

Step 1 - Sketch 

Create a new sketch on the Front plane. Draw the first 

rectangle spanning x = -7 mm to x = 0 mm and y = 

-16.78 mm to y = 33.22 mm by adding four line 

segments: a bottom edge from (-7, -16.78) mm to (0, 

-16.78) mm, a top edge from (-7, 33.22) mm to (0, 33.22) 

mm, a left edge from (-7, -16.78) mm to (-7, 33.22) mm 

and a right edge from (0, -16.78) mm to (0, 33.22) mm. 

Draw the second rectangle directly to the right, spanning 

x = 0 mm to x = 33 mm and y = 16.22 mm to y = 23.22 

mm, with four line segments connecting (0, 16.22) mm, 

(33, 16.22) mm, (0, 23.22) mm and (33, 23.22) mm. 

Draw the third rectangle adjacent to the second, 

spanning x = 33 mm to x = 40 mm and y = -16.78 mm to 

y = 23.22 mm, using four line segments that join (33, 

-16.78) mm, (40, -16.78) mm, (33, 23.22) mm and (40, 

23.22) mm. Solve the sketch. 

Step 2 - Extrude NEW 

Select all three closed sketch regions created in the 

previous step and perform a blind extrusion of 24.5 mm 

normal to the Front plane, creating three solid blocks that 

correspond to the drawn rectangles. 

Text2CAD annotation Our annotation 

Generated with Text2CAD annotation Generated with our annotation Figure 11. Comparison of the expert Text2CAD textual annotation (left) and our annotation (right) for the CAD model shown at the top. The CAD designs generated by models trained on each type of annotation are shown at the bottom. The Text2CAD annotation incorrectly describes the CAD model as a rectangular prism, which leads to the corresponding inaccurate generation result. Our annotation is consistent with the model geometry and leads to a correct result. 

18 Create a new coordinate system with Euler angles set to 

0.0, 0.0, -90.0 degrees and a translation vector of 0.0, 

0.125, 0.0. Next, draw the first face by creating a loop 

with a circle centered at (0.375, 0.375) and a radius of 

0.375. Then, draw a second loop with a rectangle that 

has rounded corners. The rectangle is defined by twelve 

lines connecting the points (0.2161, 0.0899), (0.5474, 

0.0899), (0.5474, 0.1906), (0.3381, 0.1906), (0.3381, 

0.339), (0.5329, 0.339), (0.5329, 0.4389), (0.3381, 

0.4389), (0.3381, 0.5652), (0.5474, 0.5652), (0.5474, 

0.6652), and (0.2161, 0.6652). 

Apply a scaling factor of 0.75 to the entire 2D sketch. 

Rotate the scaled 2D sketch using the Euler angles 0.0, 

0.0, -90.0 degrees and translate it using the vector 0.0, 

0.125, 0.0. 

Extrude the 2D sketch 0.125 units along the normal 

direction to generate the 3D model. Ensure that the 

extrusion does not occur in the opposite direction. This 

process will create a new solid body with dimensions of 

0.7500000000000001 in length, 0.7500000000000001 in 

width, and 0.12500000000000003 in height. 

Step 1 - Sketch 

Create a new sketch on the Front plane. Draw a circle 

centered at the origin with a radius of 76.2 mm. Add the 

letter "E" as text using the OpenSans-Bold font; its 

lower-left corner is positioned at (-47 mm, -57.94 mm), 

the baseline direction is (1, 0), and the text height is 

117.9 mm. Solve the sketch to generate the geometry. 

Step 2 - Extrude 

Select the interior region of the circle from the sketch. 

Extrude this region with a blind depth of 25.4 mm and an 

offset distance of 25.4 mm from the sketch plane, 

creating a new solid body. 

Text2CAD annotation Our annotation 

Generated with Text2CAD annotation Generated with our annotation Figure 12. Comparison of the expert Text2CAD textual annotation (left) and our annotation (right) for the CAD model shown at the top. The CAD designs generated by models trained on each type of annotation are shown at the bottom. The Text2CAD annotation incorrectly describes the letter “E” as “a rectangle with rounded corners defined by twelve lines”, which leads to an inaccurate generation result. Our annotation is consistent with the model geometry and leads to a correct result. 

19 References 

[1] FeatureScript, CAD scripting language. https://cad.onshape.com/FsDoc/. 2 [2] Onshape, 2025. Available at: https://www.onshape.com/en/. 2, 3 [3] Md Ferdous Alam and Faez Ahmed. GenCAD: Image-Conditioned Computer-Aided Design Generation with Transformer-Based Contrastive Representation and Diffusion Priors, 2024. 1 [4] Kamel Alrashedy, Pradyumna Tambwekar, Zulfiqar Haider Zaidi, Megan Langwasser, Wei Xu, and Matthew Gombolay. Generating CAD Code with Vision-Language Models for 3D Designs. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 1, 2 [5] Akshay Badagabettu, Sai Sravan Yarlagadda, and Amir Barati Farimani. Query2CAD: Generating CAD models using natu-ral language queries, 2024. 2 [6] Angel X. Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, Li Yi, and Fisher Yu. ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repos-itory, 2015. 3 [7] Tianrun Chen, Chunan Yu, Yuanqi Hu, Jing Li, Tao Xu, Run-long Cao, Lanyun Zhu, Ying Zang, Yong Zhang, Zejian Li, and Linyun Sun. Img2CAD: Conditioned 3D CAD Model Generation from Single Image with Structured Visual Geom-etry, 2024. 1, 2 [8] Kseniya Cherenkova, Djamila Aouada, and Gleb Gusev. Pvde-conv: Point-Voxel Deconvolution for Autoencoding CAD Construction in 3D. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 2741–2745, 2020. 3 [9] CadQuery contributors. Cadquery, 2025. 3 [10] Tri Dao. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better paral-lelism and work partitioning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 12 [11] Anna C. Doris, Md Ferdous Alam, Amin Heyrani Nobari, and Faez Ahmed. CAD-Coder: An Open-Source Vision-Language Model for Computer-Aided Design Code Genera-tion, 2025. 2, 3 [12] Elona Dupont, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, Sk Aziz Ali, Ilya Arzhannikov, Gleb Gusev, and Djamila Aouada. CADOps-Net: Jointly Learning CAD Operation Types and Steps from Boundary-Representations. In 2022 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , pages 114–123, 2022. 3 [13] Elona Dupont, Kseniya Cherenkova, Dimitrios Mallis, Gleb Gusev, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. TransCAD: A Hier-archical Transformer for CAD Sequence Inference from Point Clouds. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , pages 19–36, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. 1, 2 [14] Yandong Guan, Xilin Wang, Xingxi Ming, Jing Zhang, Dong Xu, and Qian Yu. CAD-Coder: Text-to-CAD Generation with Chain-of-Thought and Geometric Reward, 2025. 1, 2, 3 [15] Pin-Lun Hsu, Yun Dai, Vignesh Kothapalli, Qingquan Song, Shao Tang, Siyu Zhu, Steven Shimizu, Shivam Sahni, Haowen Ning, Yanning Chen, and Zhipeng Wang. Liger-kernel: Efficient triton kernels for LLM training. In Cham-pioning Open-source DEvelopment in ML Workshop @ ICML25 , 2025. 12 [16] Mohammad Sadil Khan, Sankalp Sinha, Talha Uddin Sheikh, Didier Stricker, Sk Aziz Ali, and Muhammad Zeshan Afzal. Text2CAD: Generating sequential CAD designs from beginner-to-expert level text prompts. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , pages 7552–7579, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2025. Curran Associates Inc. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9 [17] Sangpil Kim, Hyung-gun Chi, Xiao Hu, Qixing Huang, and Karthik Ramani. A Large-Scale Annotated Mechanical Com-ponents Benchmark for Classification and Retrieval Tasks with Deep Neural Networks. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 , pages 175–191, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing. 3 [18] Sebastian Koch, Albert Matveev, Zhongshi Jiang, Francis Williams, Alexey Artemov, Evgeny Burnaev, Marc Alexa, Denis Zorin, and Daniele Panozzo. ABC: A Big CAD Model Dataset for Geometric Deep Learning. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 9593–9603, 2019. 3, 5, 7 [19] Maksim Kolodiazhnyi, Denis Tarasov, Dmitrii Zhemchuzh-nikov, Alexander Nikulin, Ilya Zisman, Anna Vorontsova, Anton Konushin, Vladislav Kurenkov, and Danila Rukhovich. Cadrille: Multi-modal CAD Reconstruction with Reinforce-ment Learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 11 [20] Jiahao Li, Weijian Ma, Xueyang Li, Yunzhong Lou, Guichun Zhou, and Xiangdong Zhou. CAD-Llama: Leveraging Large Language Models for Computer-Aided Design Parametric 3D Model Generation. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 1, 2 [21] Pu Li, Jianwei Guo, Xiaopeng Zhang, and Dong-Ming Yan. SECAD-Net: Self-Supervised CAD Reconstruction by Learn-ing Sketch-Extrude Operations. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 16816–16826, 2023. 7 [22] Xueyang Li, Yunzhong Lou, Yu Song, and Xiangdong Zhou. Mamba-CAD: State Space Model for 3D Computer-Aided Design Generative Modeling. Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , 39(5):5013–5021, 2025. 3 [23] Yuan Li, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Xiaoxiao Long, Chenxu Zhang, Ningna Wang, Xin Li, Wenping Wang, and Xiaohu Guo. CADDreamer: CAD Object Generation from Single-view Images. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 1, 3 [24] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. 12 [25] Weijian Ma, Shuaiqi Chen, Yunzhong Lou, Xueyang Li, and Xiangdong Zhou. Draw Step by Step: Reconstructing CAD Construction Sequences from Point Clouds via Multimodal Diffusion. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 27144–27153, 2024. 1, 2 [26] Brandon Man, Ghadi Nehme, Md Ferdous Alam, and Faez Ahmed. VideoCAD: A Dataset and Model for Learning Long-Horizon 3D CAD UI Interactions from Video, 2025. 3 

20 [27] Maximilian Mews, Ansar Aynetdinov, Vivian Schiller, Peter Eisert, and Alan Akbik. Don’t Mesh with Me: Generating Constructive Solid Geometry Instead of Meshes by Fine-Tuning a Code-Generation LLM, 2025. 2 [28] Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X. Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. PartNet: A Large-Scale Benchmark for Fine-Grained and Hierarchical Part-Level 3D Object Understanding. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 909–918, 2019. 3 [29] OpenAI, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, Che Chang, Kai Chen, Mark Chen, Enoch Cheung, Aidan Clark, Dan Cook, Marat Dukhan, Casey Dvorak, Kevin Fives, Vlad Fomenko, Timur Garipov, Kris-tian Georgiev, Mia Glaese, Tarun Gogineni, Adam Goucher, Lukas Gross, Katia Gil Guzman, John Hallman, Jackie Hehir, Johannes Heidecke, Alec Helyar, Haitang Hu, Romain Huet, Jacob Huh, Saachi Jain, Zach Johnson, Chris Koch, Irina Kofman, Dominik Kundel, Jason Kwon, Volodymyr Kyrylov, Elaine Ya Le, Guillaume Leclerc, James Park Lennon, Scott Lessans, Mario Lezcano-Casado, Yuanzhi Li, Zhuohan Li, Ji Lin, Jordan Liss, Lily, Liu, Jiancheng Liu, Kevin Lu, Chris Lu, Zoran Martinovic, Lindsay McCallum, Josh Mc-Grath, Scott McKinney, Aidan McLaughlin, Song Mei, Steve Mostovoy, Tong Mu, Gideon Myles, Alexander Neitz, Alex Nichol, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Dana Palmie, Ash-ley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Jongsoo Park, Leher Pathak, Carolina Paz, Ludovic Peran, Dmitry Pimenov, Michelle Pokrass, Elizabeth Proehl, Huida Qiu, Gaby Raila, Filippo Raso, Hongyu Ren, Kimmy Richardson, David Robin-son, Bob Rotsted, Hadi Salman, Suvansh Sanjeev, Max Schwarzer, D. Sculley, Harshit Sikchi, Kendal Simon, Karan Singhal, Yang Song, Dane Stuckey, Zhiqing Sun, Philippe Tillet, Sam Toizer, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Nikhil Vyas, Eric Wallace, Xin Wang, Miles Wang, Olivia Watkins, Kevin Weil, Amy Wendling, Kevin Whinnery, Cedric Whitney, Hannah Wong, Lin Yang, Yu Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Kristen Ying, Wojciech Zaremba, Wenting Zhan, Cyril Zhang, Brian Zhang, Eddie Zhang, and Shengjia Zhao. Gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card, 2025. 13 [30] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yux-iong He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Pro-ceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , page 3505–3506, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Ma-chinery. 12 [31] Danila Rukhovich, Elona Dupont, Dimitrios Mallis, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. CAD-Recode: Reverse Engineering CAD Code from Point Clouds, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 [32] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 ,2024. 6, 9 [33] Ruiyu Wang, Yu Yuan, Shizhao Sun, and Jiang Bian. Text-to-CAD Generation Through Infusing Visual Feedback in Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 42th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 1, 2, 5 [34] Karl D. D. Willis, Yewen Pu, Jieliang Luo, Hang Chu, Tao Du, Joseph G. Lambourne, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Woj-ciech Matusik. Fusion 360 gallery: A dataset and environment for programmatic CAD construction from human design se-quences. ACM Trans. Graph. , 40(4):54:1–54:24, 2021. 3 [35] Jianyu Wu, Yizhou Wang, Xiangyu Yue, Xinzhu Ma, Jingyang Guo, Dongzhan Zhou, Wanli Ouyang, and Shix-iang Tang. CMT: A Cascade MAR with Topology Predic-tor for Multimodal Conditional CAD Generation. In 2025 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 7014–7024, 2025. 1, 3 [36] Rundi Wu, Chang Xiao, and Changxi Zheng. DeepCAD: A Deep Generative Network for Computer-Aided Design Models. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 6752–6762, 2021. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 14 [37] Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Lin-guang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong Xiao. 3D ShapeNets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 1912–1920, 2015. 3 [38] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 21469–21480, 2025. 6, 11 [39] Haoyang Xie and Feng Ju. Text-to-CadQuery: A New Paradigm for CAD Generation with Scalable Large Model Capabilities, 2025. 1, 2, 3 [40] Jingwei Xu, Chenyu Wang, Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Yi Ma, and Shenghua Gao. CAD-MLLM: Unifying Multimodality-Conditioned CAD Generation With MLLM, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 5, 11 [41] Xiang Xu, Karl D. D. Willis, Joseph G. Lambourne, Chin-Yi Cheng, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, and Yasutaka Furukawa. SkexGen: Autoregressive Generation of CAD Construction Sequences with Disentangled Codebooks. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 24698–24724. PMLR, 2022. 2 [42] Xiang Xu, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Joseph George Lam-bourne, Karl D. D. Willis, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Hierarchi-cal Neural Coding for Controllable CAD Model Generation. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , pages 38443–38461. PMLR, 2023. 2 [43] Xiang Xu, Joseph Lambourne, Pradeep Jayaraman, Zhengqing Wang, Karl Willis, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Brep-Gen: A B-rep Generative Diffusion Model with Structured Latent Geometry. ACM Trans. Graph. , 43(4):119:1–119:14, 2024. 1, 3 

21 [44] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 Technical Report, 2025. 9 [45] Yang You, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Jiaqi Han, Rahul Thomas, Haotong Zhang, Yi Du, Hansheng Chen, Francis Engelmann, Suya You, and Leonidas Guibas. Img2CAD: Reverse Engi-neering 3D CAD Models from Images through VLM-Assisted Conditional Factorization, 2025. 2 [46] Igor Zacharov, Rinat Arslanov, Maksim Gunin, Daniil Ste-fonishin, Andrey Bykov, Sergey Pavlov, Oleg Panarin, Anton Maliutin, Sergey Rykovanov, and Maxim Fedorov. “Zhores” — Petaflops supercomputer for data-driven modeling, machine learning and artificial intelligence installed in Skolkovo In-stitute of Science and Technology. Open Engineering , 9(1): 512–520, 2019. 8 [47] Qingnan Zhou and Alec Jacobson. Thingi10K: A Dataset of 10,000 3D-Printing Models, 2016. 3 [48] Shengdi Zhou, Tianyi Tang, and Bin Zhou. CADParser: A learning approach of sequence modeling for b-rep CAD. In 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23 , pages 1804–1812. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Or-ganization, 2023. 7, 11 

22