Title: 2606.28826v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28826v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:32:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# RefGlass -GS: A UAV -Enabled Fusion Framework for 

# Photorealistic , Semantic  and Interactive  Digitization of Reflective 

# Glass Faç ades via Gaussian Splatting 

## Zhenyu  Liang  ab, Xiao  Zhang  a*, Boyu  Wang  a, Zhaolun  Liang  a, Ang Li  a,

## Jeff Chak Fu  Chan  c, Mingzhu  Wang  d, Jack C.P.  Cheng  a*  

> a

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Hong Kong, China  

> b

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,  University of Maryland, College Park , Maryland ,

USA  

> c

Department of the Built Environment, National University of Singapore , Singapore  

> d

Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 

* Corresponding Authors        

> Email: zhenyu.liang @connect.ust.hk ,xiao.zhang@connect.ust.hk ,bwangbb@connect.ust.hk ,lionel_a.li@connect.ust.hk ,
> zliangaq@connect.ust.hk ,chak.fu.chan@u.nus.edu ,m.wang@cityu.edu.hk ,cejcheng@ust.hk .

Highlights: 

End -to -end architecture with real -world applications for glass  faç ade  digitization .

Individual g lass panel segmentation  using  MAP  estimation  and  structural regularities .

UAV view planning  formulation  ensure s maximal coverage of view -dependent appearance .

Deferred shading with  Reflection MLP to model  high -frequency near -field reflections .

Standardized object -based  GS  data organization  for  interactive  facility management. 

Abstract :

Existing digitization of buildings with reflective glass faç ades suffers from geometric reconstruction distortion, 

unrealistic view -dependent texture rendering, and difficulties in object -based semantic enhancement. 

Therefore, we propose RefGlass -GS, a fus ion framework that enables end -to -end UAV -based photorealistic, 

semantic, and interactive digitization of reflective glass faç ades. The contributions include: (1) proposing an 

individual glass panel segmentation method based on maximum a posteriori estimat ion with structural 

regularities, robust to severe reflection and background interference; (2) formulating a UAV viewpoint 

planning optimization function that maximizes the coverage of view -dependent appearance for sufficient data 

capture; (3) developing a n optimized Gaussian Splatting framework with a  Reflection MLP, a novel deferred 

shading function, and two enhanced regularization terms for effective  modeling  of high -frequency near -field 

reflections; (4) introducing a standardized data organization paradigm for structuring GS -based representations 

into object -based models, facilitating interactive facility management on digital twin platforms. Experiments 

on r eal -world reflective glass faç ade scenes validate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method. 

Specifically, the glass panel segmentation achieves an improvement of 0.1927 in mIoU over SOTA methods, 

and only our method enables instance -level p anel extraction. The UAV view planning improves novel view 

synthesis for reflective faç ades by 13.15 dB in PSNR compared to commercially used nap -of -the -object 

planning methods. The RefGlass -GS  modeling  outperforms SOTA Gaussian Splatting approaches for 

reflective scenes with an average improvement of 5.08 dB in PSNR. The proposed architecture encompasses 

the multi -process pipeline from data acquisition and scene  modeling  to downstream applications, contributing 

scientific algorithmic innovations while adva ncing the practical industry adoption of Gaussian Splatting. 

Keywords : Gaussian Splatting ; Reflective  Glass  Faç ade s; Digital Twin ; UAV View Planning ; High -

Frequency  Near -Field  Reflection ; Glass  Panel  Segmentation .2

1 Introduction 

Digitizing real -world buildings from captured data is a fundamental task in the development of digital 

twins and smart cities  [1] . A digital twin of a building, defined as its digital replica  [2] , provides valuable 

support for facility management across the building lifecycle. Existing building digitization pipelines typically 

rely on photogrammetry and LiDAR for 3D reconstruction to capture geometric structure and enrich semantic 

information, and  can be further extended to Scan -to -BIM workflows  [3]  that transform raw observations into 

object -based, information -rich models. However, for a ubiquitous type of architecture in modern cities, the 

buildings with reflective glass faç ades,  conventional  digitization methods  face three major challenges :

(1)  First, geometric reconstruction is unreliable.  The appearance of reflective glass faç ades is strongly 

view -dependent, which violates the multi -view consistency assumption required by photogrammetry 

[4] . As a result, photogrammetric digitization often leads to severe surface geometric distortions and 

missing structures.  LiDAR -based acquisition is also unreliable for glass, as laser beams may penetrate 

or interact irregularly with  the  surfaces,  resulting in  incomplete geometry. 

(2)  Second, realistic rendering is inadequate.  Conventional digitization methods typically adopt point 

clouds or mesh models as the underlying representation  [5] . However, both representations are limited 

to  modeling  static appearance and are incapable of faithfully representing the high -frequency, view -

dependent visual effects of reflective glass faç ades . Consequently, existing digital models of 

reflective glass faç ades often exhibit disordered or unrealistic surface textures. 

(3)  Third, semantic  modeling  is  difficult.  Semantic enrichment of digital models for reflective glass 

faç ades requires effective object -based segmentation of individual glass panels, which are important 

components in facility management.  However, current state -of -the -art  (SOTA)  glass segmentation 

methods  [6 -9]  typically  rely on  pattern or material differences to  segment  glass regions from 

surrounding elements with distinct materials, such as windows embedded in tiled or concrete faç ades. 

For an entire faç ade composed almost exclusively of glass, accurately instance -segmenting each 

individual panel remains highly challenging. 

Recent advances in 3D reconstruction and rendering, particularly the emergence of Neural Radiance 

Fields (NeRF)  [10]  and Gaussian Splatting  (GS)  [11] , have  provided new opportunities for tackling the 

digitization challenges of reflective glass faç ades.  In contrast to NeRF, which represents scenes implicitly with 

multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) and requires computationally intensive ray -based sampling and volume 

rendering,  Gaussian Splatting represents scenes explicitly with learnable Gaussians and renders them through 

rasterization.  This explicit and efficient formulation supports  high -fidelity  modeling , fast training, and 

convenient  editability  [12] . These properties make Gaussian Splatting especially promising for digital twin 

applications, where both visual realism and interactive usability are essential.  However, vanilla Gaussian 

Splatting models  color  with spherical harmonics (SH), which are inherently limited to low -frequency view -

dependent effects and thus inadequate for representing the high -frequency reflections observed on glass 

faç ades.  Recent variants  [13 -16]  for reflective scenes have attempted to address this limitation by introducing 

environment maps to model such high -frequency variations. However, environment maps assume that incident 

illumination originates from  an  infinite distan ce , whereas reflections on real -world reflective glass faç ades are 

often dominated by near -field content.  As a result, these approaches often suffer from parallax errors. 

Meanwhile, for urban building  digitization , unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are commonly used for 

data acquisition.  Effective UAV viewpoint planning is critical, as capturing data from appropriate viewpoints 

directly affects the quality of the final  modeling . However, existing UAV viewpoint planning strategies are 

primarily designed either to maximize the accuracy and completeness of photogrammetric models  [17]  or to 

improve the multi -view consistency of Gaussian Splatting reconstruction  [18] . For reflective glass faç ades, 

however, the imaging requirement is fundamentally different: the captured images should provide 

comprehensive coverage of the view -dependent appearance of the faç ade.  This  UAV viewpoint planning 

oriented toward view -dependent appearance  recovery  has not yet been adequately studied . In addition, the final 

semantically enhanced Gaussian Splatting models are  documented  as discrete Gaussian primitives rather than 

the object -based representations typically required in facility man agement  and  digital twin platform s [19] ,3

which creates the need for effective data organization to support downstream practical applications , such as 

the interactive  management and visualization .

To meet the practical demands of digitizing reflective glass faç ades for facility management, four key 

scientific problems must be addressed: 

(1)  How to  segment  individual glass panels from an entire glass faç ade to enable semantic enhancement 

of GS -based digital models ?

(2)  How to  optimize  UAV viewpoint planning to capture observations with comprehensive view -

dependent appearance for GS reconstruction ?

(3)  How to  develop  an effective and efficient Gaussian Splatting method for  modeling  high -frequency 

near -field reflections ?

(4)  How to  organize  the resulting GS representation into an object -based model suitable for  interactive 

facility management applications ?

To address these challenges, we propose  RefGlass -GS , an end -to -end fusion framework for the effective 

and efficient digitization of reflective glass faç ades , support ing  realistic rendering, semantic enhancement, and 

downstream  interactive  facility management applications.  The main contributions of this work are as follows: 

(1)  We  propose a  novel individual glass panel segmentation method  that formulates faç ade panel 

extraction as a maximum a posteriori estimation problem with structural regularities , enabling 

instance -level segmentation across an entire glass faç ade under  severe  reflection and background 

interference. 

(2)  We formulate an  effective UAV viewpoint planning  optimization function  that maximizes the 

coverage of view -dependent appearance, thereby improving the suitability of captured data for 

reflective faç ade  digitization .

(3)  We develop an  optimized Gaussian Splatting framework  with a  Reflection MLP  and two  enhanced 

regularization  terms  for  effective  modeling  of high -frequency near -field reflections,  together with a 

novel deferred shading function for  photorealistic  scene rendering. 

(4)  We introduce a  standardized  data mapping  paradigm  for organizing GS -based representations into 

object -based models, bridging the gap between Gaussian primitives and the object -centric data 

structures required  for interactive facility management on practical digital twin platforms .

Experiments on real -world buildings with reflective glass faç ades demonstrate the effectiveness of our 

RefGlass -GS. In glass panel segmentation, our method outperforms SOTA deep -learning -based glass 

segmentation approaches with an mIoU improvement of 0.192 7 and enables reliable instance -level panel 

extraction. In UAV viewpoint planning, the proposed data acquisition strategy captures view -dependent 

reflective appearance more comprehensively than commercially used nap -of -the -object view planning 

methods, the reby improving novel view synthesis for reflective faç ades by 13.15 dB in PSNR. In Gaussian 

Splatting -based  modeling , our method achieves higher -fidelity and more photorealistic results than SOTA GS 

approaches for reflective scenes, with an average improvement of 5.08 dB in PSNR.  To the best of our 

knowledge,  RefGlass -GS  is the first end -to -end fusion framework to unify multiple processes , ranging from 

data acquisition and model reconstruction to downstream application , within a Gaussian Splatting pipeline for 

real -world reflective glass faç ade scenarios  and digital twin development . The proposed  architecture 

contributes not only novel algorithms, but also a practical pathway for bringing Gaussian Splatting into real -

world industrial applications. 

2 Literature Review 

This section provides a comprehensive review of prior research in the three areas  closely  relevant to our 

contributions  and identifies the limitations of existing methods.  It is organized as follows:  (2.1) Gaussian 

Splatting and Variants for Reflective Scenes; (2.2) Glass Segmentation; and (2.3) UAV View Planning. 4

2.1  Gaussian Splatting  and Variant s for  Reflective  Scenes 

As  a breakthrough  in neural reconstruction and rendering after the advent of NeRF, Gaussian Splatting 

has received substantial attention and has developed rapidly in recent years. This research direction began in 

2023 with the introduction of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) b y Kerbl et al . [11] . The success of 3DGS can 

be attributed to several key design choices, including  (1) the use of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids to represent scene 

geometry and appearance, (2) an optimization strategy that jointly learns Gaussian attributes while dynamically 

controlling the number of primitives, and (3) a GPU -accelerated rasterization pipeline  that exploits parallel 

computation to achieve fast and efficient rendering. Benefiting from these properties, 3DGS supports 

photorealistic reconstruction, real -time rendering,  efficient training, and flexible editing. These advantages 

make Gaussian Splatting highly promising for the construction of digital twin models. 

Nevertheless , the volumetric representation of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids in 3DGS may introduce multi -view 

inconsistencies in estimated surface normals, thereby limit ing the reconstruction of accurate geometric 

surfaces. To alleviate this issue, 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS)  [20]  replaces volumetric Gaussian primitives 

with Gaussian elliptical disks that approximate mesh -like triangl es, leading to improved multi -view 

consistency and more accurate surface geometry.  Besides,  recent studies have also explored semantic 

enhancement for GS -based models.  Gaussian Grouping  [21]  first segments the input images using the Segment 

Anything Model (SAM)  [22] , and then assigns unique object identities to Gaussian primitives during training 

via mask association and 3D spatial consistency regularization. Subsequently, several language -embedded GS 

methods  [23,24]  have incorporated zero -shot foundation models to extract high -level semantic features, such 

as CLIP  [25]  or DINO  [26]  features, and embed them into Gaussian representations, enabling natural -language 

interaction with GS models. These advances in geometric  accu racy  and semantic enrichment further support 

the use of Gaussian Splatting as a representation for digital twin models. 

However, current GS -based methods still face significant challenges when applied to more complex 

scenes, especially those containing high -frequency reflective surfaces. Conventional GS -based methods 

without dedicated reflection  modeling , such as  3DGS  [11]  and 2DGS  [20] , typically rely on spherical 

harmonics for color representation, which are only suitable for  modeling  low -frequency view -dependent 

effects.  To better capture high -frequency reflective appearance, several studies have extended Gaussian 

Splatting with environment maps. One of the earliest works, GaussianShader  [13] , estimates surface normals 

from the shortest -axis directions of 3D Gaussians and employs a simplified shading function to query an 

environment map for reflection rendering. 3DGS -DR  [15]  improves this strategy by introducing normal 

propagation during training , stabilizing normal -related gradients and improving the reconstructed geometry 

used for environment -map queries. Ref -Gaussian  [14]  instead builds upon 2DGS, taking advantage of its 

relatively stable surface reconstruction to estimate normals and query the environment map, while further 

adopting a physically based deferred rendering scheme for reflection synthesis.  MaterialRefGS  [27]  introduces 

a multi -view material consistency constraint and a reflection strength prior to generate multi -view consistent 

material maps during deferred shading, thereby facilitating more accurate material inference for environment -

map -based shading.  Despite these advances, environment -map -based reflection  modeling  assumes that global 

illumination originates from infinity, which is generally only suitable for synthetic scenes. In real -world scenes, 

however, reflections are often dominated by near -field obje cts and lighting conditions, leading to parallax 

errors in these environment -map -based methods.  Subsequent studies attempted to address the limitation of 

near -field illumination through ray tracing. For example, SpecTRe -GS  [28]  first reconstructs the object and 

scene using 3DGS and an environment map, and then incorporates secondary rays to model reflections caused 

by nearby objects. IRGS  [16]  further proposes a differentiable 2D Gaussian ray tracer to compute incident 

radiance on the fly, and combines it with the full rendering equation to synthesize high -quality reflections from 

nearby objects.  Nevertheless, these methods  [16,28]  primarily target inter -reflections between objects. In 

particular, they require explicit reconstruction of the surrounding objects responsible for near -field reflections, 

after which ray tracing is used to query their reflected appearance on the target re flective surface. Therefore, 

they are unable to recover near -field reflections solely from observations of the reflective surface itself.  This 

makes them more suitable for small -scale object -centric scenes, but less practical for large real -world  scenes ,

where reconstructing all reflection -related surroundings is computationally expensive.  Additionally , Ref -GS 5

[29]  incorporates surface light fields by enriching directional encoding with spatial information and estimating 

the reflect ion  through a compact MLP; however, it still struggles to faithfully reproduce high -frequency details. 

Therefore, current GS -based  modeling  methods remain unable to  accurately  digitize the high -frequency 

near -field reflection effects of reflective glass faç ades.  To address this gap , our proposed RefGlass -GS 

introduces a  Reflection MLP combined with a deferred shading function  to better model complex reflections 

beyond previous GS -based approaches.  By further integrating semantic enhancement, RefGlass -GS provides 

a more effective framework for the digitization of reflective glass faç ades. 

2.2  Glass  Segmentation 

Glass segmentation has long been recognized as a challenging problem in computer vision due to the 

unique optical properties of glass. Unlike diffuse materials, glass often lacks stable intrinsic texture while 

simultaneously exhibiting appearance patterns  induced by the surrounding environment. Existing methods 

have increasingly adopted deep -learning paradigms to exploit learned contextual cues for this task. 

Representative works include GDNet  [30] , which constructs a large -scale Glass Detection Dataset (GDD) and 

learns abundant multi -scale contextual features to distinguish glass regions in real -world scenes. Building upon 

this, EBLNet  [6]  emphasizes enhanced boundary learning through refined edge supervision to improve the 

segmentation of glass -like objects such as windows and mirrors. GhostingNet  [7]  further leverages intrinsic 

ghosting effects arising from double reflections within glass layers via a dedicated Ghosting Effects Detection 

module to guide surface segmentation. Similarly, GlassSemNet  [8]  incorporates semantic relations between 

glass and surrounding objects to resolve ambiguities in complex scenes, while RFENet  [31]  introduces 

reciprocal feature evolution between boundary and contextual representations for robust segmentation of glass -

like objects. Complementary approaches further enhance glass segmentation by aggregating multi -level 

contextual information and reflec tion cues  [32]  or by employing edge -guided lightweight architectures to 

improve boundary precision  [33] . However, these methods  can  achieve  good  performance by  modeling  the 

intrinsic differences between glass and surrounding materials, such as low texture variance, reflection 

inconsistencies, and contextual discontinuities.  And  they typically formulate the task as semantic segmentation, 

producing binary or multi -class masks that classify pixels as glass or non -glass. For reflective glass faç ades, 

however, where most regions belong to glass and material distinctions between adjac ent panels are often weak 

or even negligible, such methods tend to segment the entire curtain w all as a single glass region, rather than 

performing instance -level segmentation to differentiate individual glass panels. 

More recently, specialized deep -learning methods have been developed for curtain wall frame 

segmentation to localize panel boundaries more directly. For example, LANet  [34]  propose s a lightweight 

attention network with an optimized transformer module for real -time curtain wall frame segmentation, 

designed to support automated faç ade installation by robots or crane operators in high -rise construction. 

Similarly, C2PNet  [35]  introduce s a context collaboration pyramid network that combines a pyramid pooling 

transformer encoder with context interaction and channel -guided pyramid convolution decoders, enabling 

accurate frame segmentation from single RGB images for curtain wall installation  robots.  However, these 

methods still rely heavily on the pronounced visual and material differences between frames and glass to 

achieve accurate frame segmentation. As evidenced by the datasets prepared in these studies, such approaches 

general ly assume frames with clearly visible width and distinct appearance, which may be suitable for windows 

or glass doors but are less applicable to reflective glass faç ades, where frame structures are often intentionally 

minimized or visually inconspicuous fo r aesthetic design. Moreover, the datasets used in both works are mainly 

composed of planar glass curtain walls, limiting their applicability to curved curtain wall structures. 

Therefore, current glass segmentation methods remain inadequate for instance -level segmentation of 

reflective glass faç ades when only subtle material differences exist between adjacent panels.  Such a limitation 

is detrimental to object -based semantic enhancement for faç ade digitization, where accurate panel -wise 

understanding is essential.  To address this gap,  our  proposed  framework  formulate s faç ade panel segmentation 

as a maximum a posteriori estimation problem  using  structural regularities, thereby enabling robust instance -

level segmentation across the entire glass faç ade under severe reflection and background interference. 6

2.3  UAV  View  Planning 

UAV view planning plays a critical role in autonomous data acquisition for high -quality 3D 

reconstruction  [36,37] . Most existing approaches have been developed for photogrammetric reconstruction, 

with the goal of achieving accurate and complete 3D models through optimized viewpoint selection and 

trajectory design. For example, Liang et al.  [38]  proposed an optimized UAV view planning framework based 

on a modified sparrow search algorithm, which integrates exploration -exploitation stages with semantic and 

geometric analysis to generate minimal yet high -quality viewpoint sets for building reconstruction. Peng et al. 

[39]  presented an adaptive view planning algorithm that starts from coarse proxy models and iteratively selects 

viewpoints on a view manifold, balancing coverage and sparsity for aerial 3D reconstruction. Similarly, Shang 

et al.  [40]  introduced a topology -based UAV path planning method for multi -view stereo reconstruction of 

complex structures, decomposing the problem into parallelizable overlapped -view optimization subproblems 

that exploit structural topology to reduce computational  cost while improving reconstruction fidelity. Zheng 

et al.  [41]  developed a cooperative route planning method for multiple UAVs, computing minimum image sets 

and optimal flight networks under battery and time constraints to obtain fine -resolution building models. Hepp 

et al.  [42]  introduced Plan3D, a viewpoint and trajectory optimization framework for aerial multi -view stereo 

that efficiently computes globally consistent paths in outdoor environments. Model -quality -guided planning 

was further explored by Zhang et al.  [43] , who designed a UAV path planning strategy driven by real -time 

reconstruction quality metrics to ensure complete and accurate 3D models of complex buildings. Specialized 

applications include the automated UAV path planning method proposed by Wang et al.  [44]  for high -quality 

photogrammetric 3D bridge reconstruction and the flight path planning strategy developed by L iu  et al.  [45] 

for UAV -based refinement inspection of construction sites, both of which iteratively refine trajectories using 

reconstruction feedback. 

However, view planning for Gaussian -based reconstruction remains at an early stage. Unlike traditional 

photogrammetry, Gaussian Splatting  demands viewpoints that not only capture geometry but also optimize the 

density and covariance of Gaussian primitives for high -fidelity rendering.  Recent works have begun to extend 

active reconstruction principles to this setting. For instance, GS -Planner  [18]  propose s a Gaussian -Splatting -

based planning framework for active high -fidelity reconstruction that performs uncertainty estimation and 

next -best -view selection directly on the evolving 3DGS representation. Building on hierarchical 

decomposition, HGS -Planner  [46]  evaluates reconstruction completion and quality gains via Fisher 

information and unobserved regions in the Gaussian representation, and integrates global and local planners 

for efficient autonomous exploration. ActiveGS  [47]  employs a hybrid Gaussian –voxel map for active scene 

reconstruction using RGB -D inputs on mobile platforms to enable accurate mapping of unknown environments. 

ActiveSplat  [48]  propose s an autonomous high -fidelity reconstruction system that combines efficient 

rendering with Voronoi -based exploration graphs within the Gaussian Splatting pipeline.  Furthermore , Wu et 

al.  [49]  investigated optimal drone trajectory planning for capturing 3DGS objects by formulating an online 

utility -based optimization problem to maximize synthesized view quality under time constraints. Nevertheless, 

existing Gaussian Splatting view planning meth ods are primarily designed for ordinary diffuse scenes with 

relatively view -independent appearance. They cannot be directly applied to reflective glass faç ades, where 

appearance is strongly view -dependent due to specular reflections. For high -fidelity reco nstruction  and 

photorealistic rendering  of glass reflections, captured images must provide sufficiently diverse angular 

observations of the reflected content; otherwise, limited viewpoint coverage may result in incomplete or 

inaccurate reflection  modeling  in the Gaussian representation  [50] .

Therefore,  current  UAV view planning methods  remain  insufficient for acquiring data suitable for high -

fidelity reconstruction and rendering of reflective glass faç ades, whose appearance varies significantly with 

viewpoint.  To address this gap , our proposed framework constructs a  unit  hemisphere model over each glass 

panel and formulates a novel optimization objective that maximizes the coverage of view -dependent 

appearance, thereby enabling more complete observation of reflection  behavior  during data acquisition. 7

3 Method ology 

The overall architecture of our proposed RefGlass -GS fusion framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. The entire 

framework consists of the following five steps: 

(1) In Step 1, we first conduct an initial UAV flight using automated simple flight planning functions, such 

as orbit flight, to reconstruct coarse models of the target building with reflective glass faç ades, including a 

coarse point cloud and a coarse mes h model. These coarse models provide a fundamental understanding of the 

site for subsequent steps. 

(2) In Step 2, we perform corner point extraction on a fronto -parallel view image captured during Step 1, 

based on maximum a posteriori estimation with structural regularities. The extracted corner points are then 

projected onto the 3D coarse mesh model to  obtain 3D glass panel models. For non -planar curved faç ades, we 

further propose a rectification method to make the glass panel segmentation robust to curved surface scenarios. 

(3) In Step 3, building upon the 3D glass panel models obtained in Step 2, we formulate a UAV view 

planning optimization problem that maximizes the coverage of view -dependent texture. Specifically, a unit 

hemisphere model is constructed on each panel to tr ansform the physical coverage objective into a 

mathematical formulation, based on which a second UAV flight is planned and executed for data acquisition. 

(4) In Step 4, we utilize the second -flight images captured in Step 3 to perform RefGlass -GS  modeling .

By constructing augmented 2D Gaussian primitives together with a  Reflection MLP, a novel deferred shading 

function, and two regularization terms, our method achieves the  modeling  of high -frequency near -field 

reflections and the embedding of panel -level semantics, thereby enabling photorealistic and semantic 

digitization  of reflective glass faç ades. 

(5) In Step 5, we organize the  GS  digital models generated in Step 4 through the proposed standardized 

object -based data organization scheme, enabling compliance with facility management requirements. The 

organized models are then imported into a practical interactive digital twin platfor m, ultimately achieving the 

full pipeline from reality capturing to digital applications. 

Fig. 1. Overall  architecture  of  the  proposed RefGlass -GS  fusion framework 

3.1  Glass  Panel  Segmentation  based on  Structural Regularities 

To achieve a generalizable glass panel segmentation approach applicable to both planar and curved 

glass faç ades, we first describe in Section 3.1.1 how curved glass faç ades can be effectively rectified into 8

planar surfaces. Subsequently, Section 3.1.2 presents a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) estimation framework 

that exploits structural regularities to accomplish individual glass panel segmentation. 

3.1.1  Image  Rectification for  Curved  Surfaces 

For curved faç ades, an image rectification step is first applied to warp the curved surface into a planar 

representation in the image domain, thereby facilitati ng subsequent segmentation. Fig.  2 illustrates the image 

rectification process for curved faç ades. A close -range frontal -view image is captured near the faç ade surface, 

containing only the faç ade region without background clutter.  By exploiting the 3D -to -2D projection 

relationship between the coarse faç ade point cloud (with spatial coordinates  (𝑋 , 𝑌 , 𝑍 )) and the corresponding 

image pixels  (𝑢 , 𝑣 ), as defined in Eq. (1), those 3D points whose projections fall within the image extent are 

identified and isolated to construct a cropped point cloud. A cyli ndrical surface model is subsequently fitted 

to this cropped point cloud through least -squares optimization  [51] , producing the cylinder parameters that 

describe the curved faç ade geometry. 

[

𝑢 

𝑣 

1

] = 𝐊  ∙ [𝐑 |𝐓 ] ∙ [

𝑋 

𝑌 

𝑍 

1

] (1) 

where  𝐊  is the camera intrinsic matrix;  𝐑  and  𝐓  denote the extrinsic rotation matrix and translation vector, 

respectively. 

Fig.  2. Image rectification  pipeline  for curved faç ade surfaces 

For the image on which panel segmentation is to be performed, the image boundaries serve to identify 

the corresponding region on the fitted cylindrical surface, thus delineating a cylindrical patch (indicated in red 

in the figure). This patch is then discr etized to generate a set of surface sample points (green points). A tangent 

plane is subsequently established at the angular midpoint of the patch (yellow plane), onto which the sampled 

surface points are orthogonally projected, yielding a flattened point  set (blue points). 

Both the original surface samples on the cylinder (green  points ) and their corresponding planar projections 

(blue  points ) are then mapped onto the target image. Within this mapping, the green points represent pixel 

positions associated with the actual 3D curved faç ade geometry, while the blue points represent the pixel 

positions that result from unwarping the curved surface  into a flat configuration. Hence, transforming a curved -

faç ade image into an equivalent planar -faç ade image reduces to estimating a coo rdinate mapping from the 

green -point pixel positions to the blue -point pixel positions. A seventh -order bivariate polynomial is adopted 

to model this transformation, achieving robust image rectification for curved faç ades. The transformation is 

formulated  as: 9

𝑢 ′ = ∑ ∑ 𝑎 𝑘𝑙 

> 7−𝑘
> 𝑙 =0
> 7
> 𝑘 =0

𝑢 𝑘 𝑣 𝑙 

𝑣 ′ = ∑ ∑ 𝑏 𝑘𝑙 

> 7−𝑘
> 𝑙 =0
> 7
> 𝑘 =0

𝑢 𝑘 𝑣 𝑙 

(2)

where  (𝑢 , 𝑣 ) are the original pixel coordinates on the curved -faç ade image (green points),  (𝑢 ′, 𝑣 ′) are the 

corresponding rectified pixel coordinates on the planar -faç ade image (blue points), and  𝑎 𝑘𝑙 , 𝑏 𝑘𝑙  are polynomial 

coefficients estimated via least -squares fitting from the paired point correspondences. The total number of 

coefficients for each coordinate is  (7+2 

> 2

) = 36 , resulting in 72 parameters in total. 

3.1.2  Maximum a Posteriori  Estimation  for  Individual Glass  Panel  Segmentation 

After transforming all images of  reflective  glass faç ades into rectified fronto -parallel views , where grid 

lines are maximally aligned with the image axes , we formulate the panel segmentation task as a Maximum A 

Posteriori (MAP) estimation problem that exploits the structural regularities of glass panels on the faç ade, 

specifically leveraging the  structural  linear features delineating panel boundaries and the repetitive patterns 

formed by these lines. 

To characterize the structural linear features, we construct structure -line intensity histograms along both 

the height and width directions of the image. As illustrated  in Fig.  3, discrete line features are first extracted 

from the image using the Probabilistic Hough Transform  [52] . These line segments are then classified into 

horizontal or vertical orientations by estimating their respective vanishing points through a RANSAC -based 

procedure  [53] . The structure -line intensity histograms record, for each row or column of the image, the 

cumulative count of pixels that belong to detected line features. Formally, we define two vectors:  𝐻𝐿𝐼  and 

𝑉𝐿𝐼 . The dimension of  𝐻𝐿𝐼  corresponds to the image height  𝐻  and encodes the horizontal line  intensity ,

whereas the dimension of  𝑉𝐿𝐼  corresponds to the image width  𝑊  and encodes the vertical line  intensity .

Specifically,  𝐻𝐿𝐼 (𝑖 ) denotes the cumulative pixel length of all horizontal line features located at row  𝑖 , and 

𝑉𝐿𝐼 (𝑗 ) denotes the cumulative pixel length of all vertical line features located at column  𝑗 . As shown in Fig. 

3, the orange bars along the vertical axis represent  𝐻𝐿𝐼 , while the blue bars along the horizontal axis 

represent  𝑉𝐿𝐼 .

Fig. 3.  Structural linear feature  extraction 

Although each peak in the structure -line intensity histograms can be interpreted as a potential boundary 

between adjacent glass panels, the significant interference caused by reflective textures and background 

noise in reflective glass faç ade scenarios can  lead to substantial errors when directly segmenting panels 

based on structural line intensities alone. Instead, we regard these peaks as prior probabilities indicating 

regions where boundaries are most likely to occur. Furthermore, by incorporating the re petitive patterns 

inherent in the structural line arrangements, we formulate a MAP estimation framework that enables more 

robust segmentation of individual glass panels 10 

We define two similarity matrices,  𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  and  𝑉𝑆𝐼𝑀 , to capture the repetitive patterns of structural lines 

along the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. The dimension of  𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  is  𝐻  × 𝐻 , and that of 

𝑉𝑆𝐼𝑀  is  𝑊  × 𝑊 . Taking  𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  as an example, let  𝐶 𝑖  denote all pixels at row  𝑖  of the image (i.e., the  𝑖 -th 

row), and  𝐶 𝑗  denote all pixels at row  𝑗  (i.e., the  𝑗 -th row). Then,  𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) quantifies the similarity between 

the  𝑖 -th and  𝑗 -th rows, computed using the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM)  [54]  as d efined in Eqs. ( 3) and 

(4). An illustration of  𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  is provided in Fig.  4.

𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝐶 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑗 ) = (2𝜇 𝑖 𝜇 𝑗  + 𝑐 1)(2𝜎 𝑖𝑗  + 𝑐 2)

(𝜇 𝑖 2 + 𝜇 𝑗 2 + 𝑐 1)(𝜎 𝑖 2 + 𝜎 𝑗 2 + 𝑐 2) , where  0 < 𝑖 , 𝑗  ≤ 𝐻  and  𝑖 , 𝑗  ∈ ℤ (3)

𝑉𝑆𝐼𝑀  (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = 𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝐶 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑗 ) = (2𝜇 𝑖 𝜇 𝑗  + 𝑐 1)(2𝜎 𝑖𝑗  + 𝑐 2)

(𝜇 𝑖 2 + 𝜇 𝑗 2 + 𝑐 1)(𝜎 𝑖 2 + 𝜎 𝑗 2 + 𝑐 2) , where  0 < 𝑖 , 𝑗  ≤ 𝑊  and  𝑖 , 𝑗  ∈ ℤ (4)

where,  𝜇 𝑖  and  𝜇 𝑗  denote the mean values of  𝐶 𝑖  and  𝐶 𝑗  respectively, while  𝜎 𝑖  and  𝜎 𝑗  represent their standard 

deviations.  𝜎 𝑖𝑗  indicates the covariance between  𝐶 𝑖  and  𝐶 𝑗  . Constants  𝑐 1 and  𝑐 2 are introduced to avoid 

numerical instability caused by a denominator of zero. 

Fig. 4.  Repetitive patterns  represented by  similarity matrice s

After that, the structural line intensities are used as the prior probability, and the similarity matrices are 

used as the likelihood function to construct  the  MAP model s 𝐻𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  and  𝑉𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  for identifying 

glass panel corner point at horizontal and vertical directions, as shown in Eqs. ( 5) and ( 6). 

𝐻𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝑖 ) = ∑ 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) × 𝑁𝑜𝑟 𝐻𝐿𝐼  (𝑗 )

> 𝐻
> 𝑗 =1

(5)

𝑉𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝑖 ) = ∑ 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑉𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) × 𝑁𝑜𝑟 𝑉𝐿𝐼 (𝑗 )

> 𝑊
> 𝑗 =1

(6)

where  𝑁𝑜𝑟𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀  and  𝑁𝑜𝑟 𝑉 𝑆𝐼𝑀  denote the normalized similarity matrices, while  𝑁𝑜𝑟𝐻𝐿𝐼  and  𝑁𝑜𝑟 𝑉𝐿𝐼 

denote the normalized structure -line intensities  histograms . Taking the horizontal direction as an example, the 

normalization procedures are defined as follows: 

𝑁𝑜𝑟 𝐻𝐿𝐼  (𝑗 ) = 𝐻𝐿𝐼 (𝑗 )

max   

> 𝑘 ∈𝐻

𝐻𝐿𝐼 (𝑘 ) (7)

𝑁𝑜𝑟𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = exp  (𝛽  ∙ 𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ))

∑ exp  (𝛽  ∙ 𝐻𝑆𝐼𝑀 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ))𝑗 ∈𝐻 

(8)

Here,  𝛽  is a temperature parameter that controls the sharpness of the softmax normalization , and  is set to 20 in 

our  experiments. 11 

The local maxima identified in  𝐻𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  and  𝑉𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  correspond to the corner points of the glass 

panels, as illustrated  in Fig.  5(a) . For curved faç ades, the corner points extracted in the rectified image are 

further mapped back to the unrectified image using the fitted seventh -order polynomial  as  shown  in Eq. (2) .

Then, we project the glass corner points from the 2D image domain onto the initial 3D coarse mesh model 

via ray casting.  Because corner extraction in the image  may incur subtle pixel -level errors, which can be 

amplified after ray casting over distances of tens of meters, the resulting 3D panel corners are regularized: for 

each row of corners, the  𝑧 -coordinates are averaged, and for each column, the  𝑥 - and  𝑦 -coordinates are 

averaged, thereby reducing segmentation -induced deviations. The 3D panel models are then obtained by 

pairing the regularized corner points , as shown in  Fig . 5(b) .

The proposed glass panel segmentation approach demonstrates robustness against reflections and 

distortions. Moreover, the method accommodates scenarios where glass panel sizes vary, and panels arranged 

along  each  direction are not required to share identical dimensions. This flexibility arises because the extraction 

of repetitive patterns is agnostic to the specific spacing between line features, thereby generalizing to faç ades 

with non -uniform panel configuration s. 

(a)  (b) 

Fig. 5. Glass panel segmentation results: (a) 2D corner point extraction by MAP estimation; (b) 3D panel 

model generation through ray casting 

3.2  UAV View Planning Formulation for  Maximal  Texture Coverage 

The objective of our UAV view planning is to maximize the coverage of view -dependent reflective 

textures on the glass faç ade, thereby enabling the recovered model to render more photorealistic scenes. This 

overarching goal can be discretized equivalently a s ensuring that the view -dependent texture of each individual 

glass panel on the faç ade is observed and captured from as many  perspectives  as possible. 

Therefore , we formulate the objective of maximal view -dependent texture coverage on each individual 

3D glass panel. For each panel, we first extract its centroid  𝑐  and surface normal vector  𝑛 ⃗ . A unit hemisphere 

oriented along  𝑛 ⃗ is then constructed with  𝑐  as the origin. Achieving maximal texture coverage for each glass 

panel can thus be equivalently expressed as ensuring that the UAV's lines of sight collectively cover the unit 

hemisphere of each panel as completely as possible. 

To this end, we establish a spherical coordinate system centered at the panel centroid  𝑐 , and partition the 

unit hemisphere according to the polar angle  𝜃 and azimuthal angle  𝜑 . The hemisphere is discretized at 30 -

degree intervals for both  𝜃  and  𝜑 , yielding 36 sections per panel hemisphere. Let  𝑜  denote the optical center 

of the UAV camera. The line connecting  𝑜  to  𝑐  defines a viewing direction  𝑜𝑐 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ . A section of the panel's 12 

hemisphere is considered covered if  𝑜𝑐 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ passes through that section and  𝑜𝑐 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ lies within the field of view of the 

UAV camera,  as illustr ated in Fig.  6.

Fig.  6. Unit  hemisphere  model for  UAV  view planning  formulation 

Accordingly, we  formulate  this as an optimization problem. Since UAV view planning constitutes an 

Orienteering Problem with NP -hard computational complexity  [55] , we employ a  meta heuristic swarm -based 

optimization algorithm to solve it. The optimization population is defined as  𝑃𝑂𝑃 , where each individual in 

the swarm represents a viewpoint set  𝑉𝑆 . Each viewpoint set contains  𝑁  viewpoints  𝑉𝑃 , and each  𝑉𝑃  is 

parameterized by five degrees of freedom: position and orientation  (𝑋 , 𝑌 , 𝑍 , pitch , yaw ). The  optimization aims 

to identify the optimal viewpoint set  𝑉 𝑆 ∗ that maximizes the overall texture coverage, as formulated in Eq. ( 9). 

𝑉 𝑆 ∗ = argmax 

> 𝑉𝑆 ∈𝑃𝑂𝑃

𝐸 (𝑉𝑆 )

s. t. 𝐷 (𝑉𝑃 (𝑖 )) ≥ 𝑑 𝑚𝑖𝑛 , ∀𝑖  = 1,2, ⋯ , 𝑁  (9)

where , 𝐷 (𝑉𝑃 (𝑖 )) denotes the minimum distance from the  𝑖 -th viewpoint in the viewpoint set to the faç ade, 

and  𝑑 min  represents the safety distance threshold, which is set to 10 meters. 

Let  𝐻 𝑆 (𝑗𝑘 ) denote the  𝑘  -th hemisphere section on the  𝑗  -th glass panel. The fitness function  𝐸  that 

evaluates the texture coverage of a viewpoint set is defined in Eq. ( 10 ): 

𝐸 (𝑉𝑆 ) = ∑ ∑ ⟦∑ Interaction (𝑉𝑃 (𝑖 ), 𝐻𝑆 (𝑗 𝑘 ))

> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

⟧

> 36
> 𝑘 =1
> 𝑀
> 𝑗 =1

(10 )

where  𝑀  is the number of  glass  panel s; Interaction (𝑉 𝑃 (𝑖 ), 𝐻 𝑆 (𝑗𝑘 )) evaluates whether the viewing direction  𝑜𝑐 ⃗⃗⃗⃗

of viewpoint  𝑉 𝑃 (𝑖 ) intersects with hemisphere section  𝐻 𝑆 (𝑗𝑘 ). To avoid the computational burden of ray -mesh 

intersection tests, we instead project  𝑜𝑐 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ into the panel's spherical coordinate system to obtain its angular 

coordinates  𝜃 𝑖𝑗  and  𝜑 𝑖𝑗  , and determine whether they fall within the  𝜃  and  𝜑  bounds of the corresponding 

hemisphere section. If so, the viewpoint is considered to intersect with that section. The operator  ⟦∙⟧ is an 

indicator function that returns 1 if at least one viewpoint in the set intersects with a given hemisphere section, 

and 0 otherwise. In this manner, the fitness function  𝐸  counts the total number of hemisphere sections covered 

across all panels. 

The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm  [56]  is employed to solve this optimization formulation. 

Viewpoint set candidates are initialized as the population with a population size of  𝑃𝑂𝑃  = 50 , where each 

viewpoint is constrained to lie beyond the minimum safety distance  𝑑 min  from the faç ade. The number of 

viewpoints  𝑁  within each viewpoint set is determined through the parametric analysis presented in Section 

4.2.1. The optimization process is executed for a total of 200 iterations; experimental results demonstrate that 

this number of iterations is sufficient for the o ptimization to converge. 

The optimized viewpoint set  𝑉 𝑆 ∗obtained through the proposed UAV view planning is subsequently used 

to solve a Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) via a greedy algorithm  [38] , generating the shortest  obstacle -

avoidance  flight trajectory that traverses all viewpoints. The resulting viewpoints and trajectory are then loaded 

into the UAV to conduct a second flight for image acquisition. 

3.3  RefGlass -GS  Modeling  of  Reflective  Glass  Faç ade s

The image dataset acquired from the second flight is further utilized to perform photorealistic and 

semantic digitization via Gaussian Splatting, while also supporting subsequent interactive functionalities. The 13 

captured images first undergo the preprocessing pipeline described in Section 3.3.1, followed by the  modeling 

procedures detailed in Sections 3.3.2 through 3.3.4. 

3.3.1  Preprocessing  of  the  Second Flight  Captured Data 

We first perform glass panel semantic segmentation on the images captured during the second flight. 

Unlike repeating the glass panel segmentation procedure of Section 3.1 for each individual image, we leverage 

the 3D panel models obtained in Section 3. 1. 2, combined with the geo -coordinates and orientation of each 

photograph, to conduct 3D semantic back -projecti on via Eq. (1).  The resulting back -projected segmentation 

maps are illustrated in  Fig.  7. Notab ly, the semantic label assigned to each glass panel is  stored solely as its 

panel index, that is, each distinct color in the segmentation map corresponds to a unique glass panel index. 

This compact storage scheme minimizes memory consumption and simultaneously facilitates the panel 

numbering required for the  interactive facility management presented in Section 3.4. 

Fig. 7. Semantic back -projection for glass panel segmentation on second -flight images 

Subsequently, we aim to obtain sufficiently accurate normal maps to serve as the basis for the Reflection 

MLP estimation described in Section 3.3.3. The captured images are processed through oblique 

photogrammetric reconstruction to generate a correspondin g 3D mesh model. However, this mesh model 

exhibits geometric distortions in the reflective glass faç ade regions. Simply overlaying the 3D panel models 

obtained in Section 3. 1.2  onto this mesh model still results in an uneven faç ade surfac e (Fig.  8(a) ), as  the mesh 

often contains local protrusions and irregularities within the panel regions. On the other hand, naively 

substituting the corresponding mesh regions with the 3D panel models would inadvertently remove the 

surrounding frame structures. To overcome  this problem, each 3D panel undergoes a slight in -plane contraction 

toward its center, and a small cuboid -shaped region is constructed along the normal of the panel. The  region 

of the coarse faç ade mesh falling within this cuboid is then replaced by the co ntracted 3D panel geometry. 

This operation produces the refined faç ade surface depicted in Fig.  9, thereby achieving geometrically faithful 

reconstruction of reflective glass faç ades  (Fig.  8(b)) . The refined faç ade model is subsequently rendered at 

each camera pose to produce a corresponding normal map.  In a ddition, a faç ade region mask is rendered to 

delineate the faç ade extent, enabling the complex view -dependent reflective regions to be distinguished from 

the diffuse background areas for separate  modeling  and rendering. 

The complete set of data prepared for subsequent digitization comprises: RGB images, panel semantic 

segmentation maps,  refined  normal maps, faç ade mask images, camera poses, and the point cloud model . 

> (a) (b)

Fig . 8. Refined mesh  by (a)  simply overlapping and  (b)  cuboidal region  replacement 14 

Fig. 9. Cuboidal region replacement for faç ade surface refinement 

3.3.2  Augmented  2D Gaussian Splatting and  Deferred Shading Function 

We employ 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS)  [20]  as the foundational primitive for the reconstruction and 

rendering of reflective glass faç ades. In contrast to 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)  [11] , which models scenes 

through volumetric Gaussian ellipsoids, 2DGS leverages flat Gaussian elliptical disks as its scene 

representation. This disk -based formulation enhances multi -view geometric consistency with respect to both 

surface  normal  and depth estimates, enabling reliable extraction of faç ade surface geometry across varying 

camera viewpoints.  For background regions falling outside the faç ade masks, standard 2DGS reconstruction 

and rendering are performed. For regions within the faç ade masks that co rrespond to the reflective glass faç ade, 

the following specialized procedures are applied. 

Each standard 2D Gaussian primitive is defined by the following parameters: a center position  𝐩 𝑘 , two 

principal tangential vectors  𝐭 𝑢 and  𝐭 𝑣 , two corresponding scaling factors  𝑠 𝑢 and  𝑠 𝑣 , an opacity value  𝛼 , and a 

spherical harmonics -based color coefficient vector  𝐜 . In addition to this standard parameterization, we augment 

each Gaussian primitive with  three  additional attributes: a reflectivity coefficient  𝑟 , panel semantics  𝑠  and a 3 -

dimensional Fresnel base reflectance vector  𝐟 0 for computing the Fresnel term.  The Fresnel term governs the 

intensity of specular reflection as a function of the incident viewing angle, effectively reproducing the 

physically grounded optical behavior of glass , whereby reflectance  increases  at grazing incidence and 

decreases  when the viewing direction approaches the surface normal. 

Within the local tangent plane established in world coordinates, the 2D Gaussian primitive is expressed 

thro ugh Eq. (1 1) and Eq. (1 2). For a given point with local coordinates  𝐮  = (𝑢 , 𝑣 ) on the tangent plane, the 

corresponding Gaussian evaluation is obtained via Eq. (1 3). 

𝑃 (𝑢 , 𝑣 ) = 𝐩 𝑘  + 𝑠 𝑢 𝐭 𝑢 𝑢  + 𝑠 𝑣 𝐭 𝑣 𝑣  = 𝐻 (𝑢 , 𝑣 , 1,1)⊤ (11)

𝐻  = [𝑠 𝑢 𝐭 𝑢  𝑠 𝑣 𝐭 𝑣  0 𝑝 𝑘 

0 0 0 1 ] = [𝑅𝑆  𝐩 𝑘 

0 1 ] (12)

𝒢 (𝐮 ) = exp  (− 𝑢 2 + 𝑣 2

2 ) (13)

Building upon the above formulations, the rendering process in 2DGS is essentially equivalent to 

determining the mapping between a camera pixel  𝐱  = (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) and the local tangent -plane coordinates  𝐮  =

(𝑢 , 𝑣 ) of each 2D Gaussian primitive. This mapping is resolved through a ray –splat intersection operation, 

where  𝑊  ∈ ℝ4×4represents the world -to -screen transformation matrix: 

𝐱  = (𝑥𝑧 , 𝑦𝑧 , 𝑧 , 1)⊤ = 𝑊𝐻 (𝑢 , 𝑣 , 1,1)⊤ (14)

Once the correspondence from pixel  (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) to local coordinates  (𝑢 , 𝑣 ) has been established, the Gaussian 

contribution at that pixel is evaluated through Eq. ( 13), and the intersection depth  𝑧  is derived from Eq. ( 14). 

The  pixel  spherical harmonics -based color  𝐜 (𝐱 ), the reflectivity map  𝑅 (𝐱 ), panel semantic map  𝑆 (𝐱 ) and the 

Fresnel base reflectance map  𝐹 0(𝐱 ) are subsequently rendered via volumetric alpha -blending during 

rasterization: 15 

𝐜 (𝐱 ) = ∑ 𝐜 𝑖 𝛼 𝑖 𝒢 ̂𝑖 (𝐮 (𝐱 )) ∏(1 − 𝛼 𝑗 𝒢 ̂𝑗 (𝐮 (𝐱 )))

> 𝑖 −1
> 𝑗 =1𝑖 =1

(15)

𝑅 (𝐱 ) = ∑ 𝑟 𝑖 𝛼 𝑖 𝒢 ̂𝑖 (𝐮 (𝐱 )) ∏(1 − 𝛼 𝑗 𝒢 ̂𝑗 (𝐮 (𝐱 )))

> 𝑖 −1
> 𝑗 =1𝑖 =1

(16)

𝑆 (𝐱 ) = ∑ 𝑠 𝑖 𝛼 𝑖 𝒢 ̂𝑖 (𝐮 (𝐱 )) ∏(1 − 𝛼 𝑗 𝒢 ̂𝑗 (𝐮 (𝐱 )))

> 𝑖 −1
> 𝑗 =1𝑖 =1

(1 7)

𝐹 0(𝐱 ) = ∑ 𝐟 0,𝑖 𝛼 𝑖 𝒢 ̂𝑖 (𝐮 (𝐱 )) ∏(1 − 𝛼 𝑗 𝒢 ̂𝑗 (𝐮 (𝐱 )))

> 𝑖 −1
> 𝑗 =1𝑖 =1

(18)

where  𝒢 ̂ represents a low -pass filtered variant of the Gaussian kernel, which is incorporated to alleviate 

optimization instabilities arising from highly oblique viewing angles. 

During the rendering process, different appearance components are first rendered into separate 2D image 

maps independently and then composited, following a deferred shad ing strategy. Specifically, we define a 

rendered image  𝐼  as the composition of a diffuse color component  calculated  by Eq. (1 5),  and a specular 

reflection component. The diffuse color is represented by the rendered spherical harmonics -based color map, 

while the specular reflection is estimated through the  Reflection MLP detailed in Section 3.3.3. The deferred 

shading function is formally defined in Eq. (1 9). 

𝐼 (𝐱 ) = (1 − 𝑅 (𝐱 )) ∙ 𝐜 (𝐱 ) + 𝑅 (𝐱 ) ∙ 𝐹 (𝐱 ) ∙ ReflMLP (𝐗 , 𝜔 𝑟 ) (1 9)

where  𝐗  denotes the 3D surface position corresponding to pixel  𝐱 , and  𝜔 𝑟  represents the reflection direction, 

which is computed from the viewing direction  𝜔 𝑜  and the local surface normal  𝐧  via Eq. ( 20 ).  Given that 

reflective glass faç ades exhibit negligible surface roughness and can thus be treated as ideal specular reflectors, 

the Fresnel term  𝐹  is evaluated via Schlick's approximation, as formulated in Eq. ( 21 ). 

𝜔 𝑟  = 𝜔 𝑜  − 2(𝜔 𝑜 

> ⊤

𝐧 )𝐧  (20 )

𝐹  = 𝐹 0 + (1 − 𝐹 0)(1 − 𝐧 ⊤(−𝜔 𝑜 ))5 (21 )

3.3.3  Reflection MLP 

To achieve accurate  modeling  of high -frequency near -field specular reflections from observations, we 

design a Reflection MLP to estimate the specular reflection component. Its detailed architecture is illustrated 

in Fig.  10. Th e network architecture consists of eight fully connected layers, each containing 512 hidden units 

with ReLU activation functions, terminated by an output layer with sigmoid activation. As standard MLPs are 

inherently biased toward learning low -frequency co mponents  [57] , while specular reflections are characterized 

by high -frequency spatial variations, the inputs  𝐗  and  𝜔 𝑟  are first projected into a high -dimensional space 

through Fourier feature encoding  [58] , as specified  in Eq. ( 22). Before  applying the encoding,  𝐗  is rescaled to 

the interval [ -1, 1], and  𝜔 𝑟  is constrained to unit length. We adopt  𝐿  = 12  for both  𝛾 (𝐗 ) and  𝛾 (𝜔 𝑟 ) to provide 

adequate frequency bandwidth for capturing high -frequency specular details. 

γ(𝑝 ) = (sin (20𝜋𝑝 ) , cos (20𝜋𝑝 ) , ⋯ , sin (2𝐿 −1𝜋𝑝 ) , cos (2𝐿 −1𝜋𝑝 )) (2 2)

The encoded position  𝛾 (𝐗 ) is initially processed through the first four layers independently, without being 

concatenated with the direction input at the outset, allowing the network to capture position -dependent material 

properties and extract spatially relevant features. This  staged  fusion strategy facilitates the disentanglement of 

spatially varying characteristics from view -dependent reflective appearance. At the fifth layer, the learned 

positional features are combined with the encoded reflection direction  𝛾 (𝜔 𝑟 ) , and  𝛾 (𝐗 ) is reintroduced 

through a skip connection. The skip connection promotes stable gradient propagation and retains fine -grained 

positional information, alleviating over -smoothing artifacts in deeper layers. The output is ultimately passed 

through a sigmoid ac tivation to yield the specular reflected RGB color  ReflMLP (𝐗 , 𝜔 𝑟 ).16 

Fig . 10. Architecture of  Reflection MLP 

3.3.4  Regularization 

To fully  utilize  the precise faç ade geometry obtained in Section 3. 3. 1 and to ensure that high -frequency 

appearance characteristics are adequately captured, we introduce two supplementary regularization terms: a 

normal -prior loss and a high -frequenc y loss. 

Normal -prior loss.  As expressed in Eq. ( 23), we compute an  ℒ1 loss  between the rendered surface 

normals  𝐧  and the reference normals  𝐧 ̂ derived from the accurate faç ade geometry under the corresponding 

viewpoint. This term enforces the geometric consistency of the reconstructed faç ade surface. 

## ℒ𝑛𝑝  = 1

## |Ω| ∑‖𝐧 (𝐱 ) − 𝐧 ̂ (𝐱 )‖1

> 𝐱 ∈Ω

(2 3)

where  Ω denotes the set of valid pixels. 

High -frequency loss.  As specified in Eq. ( 24), we concentrate the supervision signal on pixels whose 

color residual exceeds a predefined threshold  𝜏 . In particular, we identify the subset of pixels exhibiting large 

ℒ1 residuals  between the rendered color  𝐜  and the ground -truth color  𝐜 𝐠𝐭 , and compute the mean residual over 

this subset. In practice, we observe that relying solely on the standard RGB reconstruction loss  ℒ𝑐  in Gaussian 

Splatting tends to spread errors uniformly across the image, producing overly smooth results that fail to 

faithfully recover sharp, high -frequency reflective details. The proposed high -frequency loss explicitly targets 

and corrects these high -residual regions. 

ℒℎ𝑓  = ∑ 𝕀 (‖𝐜 (𝐱 ) − 𝐜 𝐠𝐭 (𝐱 )‖1 > 𝜏 )𝐱 ∈Ω ‖𝐜 (𝐱 ) − 𝐜 𝐠𝐭 (𝐱 )‖1

∑ 𝕀 (‖𝐜 (𝐱 ) − 𝐜 𝐠𝐭 (𝐱 )‖1 > 𝜏 )𝐱 ∈Ω + 𝜀  (2 4)

where  𝕀 (⋅) denotes the indicator function,  𝜀  is a small constant introduced to prevent division by zero, and  𝜏  is 

initialized at 0.2 and progressively decreased in a stepwise  manner  over the course of training, reaching a final 

value of 0.09. 

Overall objective.  The complete training objective is formulated in Eq. ( 27). Here,  ℒ𝑐  combines an  ℒ1

term with the D -SSIM term, and  ℒ𝑛  denotes the normal -consistency loss; both adhere to the definitions in the 

original 2DGS formulation , as shown in  Eq s. ( 25) and  (26).

ℒ𝑐  = (1 − 𝜆 )ℒ1 + 𝜆 ℒ𝐷 −𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀  (2 5)

where  𝜆  = 0.2.

ℒ𝑛  = ∑ 𝜔 𝑖 (1 − 𝐧 𝑖 

> ⊤

𝐍 )

> 𝑖

(2 6)

where  𝐧 𝑖  is the normal of the  𝑖 -th splat,  𝜔 𝑖  is the alpha -blending weight, and  𝐍  is the normal estimated from 

the depth map gradient .

ℒ = ℒ𝑐  + 𝜆 𝑛 ℒ𝑛  + 𝜆 𝑛𝑝 ℒ𝑛𝑝  + 𝜆 ℎ𝑓 ℒℎ𝑓  (2 7)

where  𝜆 𝑛  = 0.05 , 𝜆 𝑛𝑝  = 1, and  𝜆 ℎ𝑓  is initialized at 1 and progressively increased in a stepwise manner during 

training, reaching a final value of 10. 17 

3.4  Object -based  Standa rd iz ed Data  Organization  for Interactive Facility Management 

For the photorealistic and semantic scenes containing reflective glass faç ades reconstructed via Gaussian 

Splatting in Section 3.3, the storage format is based on the PLY format, which encodes discrete point data 

augmented with per -point attributes. While  this format is adequate for visualization purposes, facility 

management, asset documentation, and user interaction demand object -based data organization,  similar  to the 

representation employed in BIM models  [59,60] . Accordingly, this paper proposes, for the first time, a 

mapping from the discrete Gaussian primitives of Gaussian Splatting to an object -based representation, thereby 

rendering the reconstructed scene  more readily applicable  to real -world interactive applications for facility 

management. 

For a scene reconstructed via Gaussian Splatting, we define three complementary organizational 

structures: a semantic organization, a non -semantic organization, and an auxiliary rendering organization.  The 

semantic organization structures data into a hierarchical format comprising four layers:  GsScene  Layer, 

GsComponent  Layer,  GsElement  Layer, and  GsGaussian  Layer. These layers respectively represent the entire 

scene, a specific category or building component, the individually segmented elements within a component, 

and the collection of Gaussian primitives together with their associated attributes that consti tute each element. 

For portions of the scene that have not undergone semantic enhancement, the non -semantic organization is 

adopted, consisting of three layers:  GsScene  Layer,  GsComponent  Layer, and  GsGaussian  Layer. In addition, 

the auxiliary rendering organization accommodates supplementary components that assist in rendering. For 

instance, the network weights of MLPs employed during rendering are stored within this structure. This 

auxiliary organization is f urther extensible, allowing the storage of other scene -level information beyond 

Gaussian primitives, such as environment map representations. 

For the RefGlass -GS model generated by our framework, the reflective glass faç ade portion is mapped to 

the four -layer semantic organization, where the  GsComponent  Layer represents the entire reflective glass 

faç ade, the  GsElement  Layer encodes each individual glass panel, and the  GsGaussian  Layer organizes the 

augmented 2D Gaussian disks introduced in Section 3.3.2. The background portion is mapped to the three -

layer non -semantic organization, where the  GsComponent  Layer represents the entire background and  the 

GsGaussian  Layer stores standard 2D Gaussian disks. Within the auxiliary rendering organization, the trained 

weights of the reflective MLP are stored. 

Fig. 11. Interactive facility management of RefGlass -GS model in digital twin platform 18 

The model file organized through the proposed object -based standardized data structure is imported into 

an interactive digital twin platform  [61] , as shown  in Fig.  11. Scene rendering is performed via Eq. (1 9). Th e

structured model file facilitates efficient parsing by the platform and enables users to interactively select and 

inspect individual elements, such as a specific glass panel. Furthermore, additional facility management -

related information can be attached at the  GsComponent  Layer or  GsElement  Layer, including  material 

properties , inspection timestamps, defect detection results, and maintenance records.  In Fig. 11, we provide 

hypothetical attributes in the documentation as illustrative examples.  This design allows the Gaussian Splatting 

model to fully leverage its photorealistic scene representation and rendering capabilities while simultaneously 

fulfilling the functional requirements of practical industry applications. 

4 Experimental  Validation 

To validate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed end -to -end fusion framework for reflective 

glass faç ade digitization, we conduct experiments on two real -world reflective glass faç ade scenes in Hong 

Kong: an office building located in Sha Tin  and the library at The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, denoted as ST and UST respectively, as shown i n Fig. 1 2. The  ST scene features a planar 

reflective glass faç ade, whereas the UST scene presents a curved one, thereby allowing the framew ork to be 

evaluated under distinct geometric configurations.  In the experiments, a DJI M3E UAV equipped with an RTK 

module is employed for automated image acquisition along the designed viewpoints. The captured images 

have a resolution of 5280× 3956 pixels. The RTK module enables centimeter -level positioning accurac y for 

the UAV. All experiments presented in this paper are executed on a server equipped with two NVIDIA RTX 

4090 GPUs providing a total of 48 GB of memory. 

To systematically validate the effectiveness of each proposed method, the following experiments are 

conducted: Section 4.1 compares the proposed MAP estimation -based glass panel segmentation method 

exploiting structural regularities against existing deep l earning -based glass segmentation approaches, thereby 

demonstrating its effectiveness in individual glass panel segmentation; Section 4.2 compares the proposed 

maximal texture coverage -based UAV view planning method with the prevailing commercial nap -of -the -

object view planning strategy, thereby demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed data acquisition scheme 

in recovering view -dependent appearance; Section 4.3 presents baseline comparisons, ablation studies, and 

validation of the Reflection MLP desig n for the proposed RefGlass -GS  modeling  method. 

(a) ST  case  (b) UST  case 

Fig. 1 2. Illustration of  two  validation scenes 19 

4.1  Evaluation  on  Glass Panel Segmentation 

We first validate the proposed individual glass panel segmentation method applied to entire glass faç ades. 

Three state -of -the -art deep learning -based glass segmentation methods are selected as baselines: EBLNet  [6] ,

GhostingNet  [7] , and GlassSemNet  [8] . The images used for validation are those captured during the second 

flight described in Section 3.3.1. The segmentation masks produced by our method are obtained by back -

projecting the 3D glass panels derived in Section 3. 1. 2, which originate from the  MAP estimation -based 

individual glass panel segmentation of a single fronto -parallel view image in Section 3.1 , onto each image. 

These  back -projection  images  allow the evaluation to extend beyond the single fronto -parallel view used in 

Section 3.1, encompass ing a broader set of multi -view images for glass panel segmentation assessment. 

The quantitative evaluation metrics are organized into three categories. The first category computes the 

overall mean Intersection -over -Union (mIoU) between the predicted glass mask and the ground -truth reflective 

glass faç ade region, measuring whether the  entire reflective glass faç ade area is correctly distinguished from 

the remaining materials. The second category evaluates the coverage of the predicted masks over individual 

glass panels; specifically, for each panel, the coverage ratio is first computed , and then the 20th, 10th, and 5th 

percentiles across all panel coverage values are reported, thereby indicating whether any individual glass 

panels are missed during segmentation and quantifying the severity of such omissions. The third category 

calculate s the mIoU between the predicted individual glass panel masks and the corresponding ground -truth 

individual panel masks, directly assessing the effectiveness and accuracy of the method in individual glass 

panel segmentation. Both  ground -truth overall glass  faç ade masks and individual panel masks are obtained 

through careful manual annotation on the captured RGB images. 

(a) Glass segmentation on ST case 20 

(b) Glass segmentation on UST case 

Fig. 13. Qualitative comparison of glass panel segmentation. For EBLNet, GhostingNet, and GlassSemNet, 

white masks indicate glass material segmentation, whereas for our method, different colored masks represent 

distinct individual panels. 

The quantitative and qualitative comparison results are presented i n Table 1 and Fig. 1 3, respectively. As 

evidenced by the results, under the interference of reflective textures and background clutter, our proposed 

glass panel segmentation method achieves an average improvement of 0.1927 in mIoU over  the best -

performing  SOTA  methods in overall glass material  distinction . Moreover, only our method is capable of 

performing individual glass panel segmentation, and the coverage percentiles confirm that our app roach does 

not miss any individual glass panels during segmentation. 

Upon further analysis, in the ST case featuring a planar reflective glass faç ade, EBLNet and GlassSemNet 

are susceptible to background interference, erroneously segmenting portions of the background as glass, with 

EBLNet being more severely affected. Furth ermore, due to the interference of reflective textures, EBLNet 

exhibits segmentation omissions within regions that belong to glass, as reflected in the coverage 5th percentile 

metric for the ST scene. Although GhostingNet is able to segment the reflective  glass faç ade relatively 

completely in the ST case, it produces erroneous segmentation at glass boundary regions and other peripheral 

areas. In the UST case featuring a curved reflective glass faç ade, EBLNet, GhostingNet, and GlassSemNet all 

exhibit varying  degrees of missed panel segmentation. Compared with the planar glass case, their performance 

deteriorates in both overall mIoU and coverage percentiles, demonstrating that existing SOTA methods are 

less effective in segmenting non -planar glass surfaces th an planar ones. In contrast, our method overcomes the 21 

limitations posed by curved glass geometry as well as the interference from background and reflective textures 

by exploiting structural regularities, thereby achieving complete and omission -free panel segmentation. 

Table 1.  Quantitative  comparison results of glass panel segmentation 

Metrics  EBLNet  [6]  GhostingNet  [7]  GlassSemNet  [8]  Ours 

ST 

Overall mIoU  0.4701  0.8597  0.8020  0.9895 

Coverage  20% percentile  1.0000  1.0000  1.0000  1.0000 

Coverage  10% percentile  0.7829  1.0000  1.0000  1.0000 

Coverage  5% percentile  0.2881  1.0000  1.0000  1.0000 

Individual mIoU  N/A  N/A  N/A  0.9787 

UST 

Overall mIoU  0.4339  0.7316  0.6218  0.9871 

Coverage  20% percentile  0.1128  0.7277  0.9058  1.0000 

Coverage  10% percentile  0.0127  0.3126  0.1824  1.0000 

Coverage  5% percentile  0.0031  0.1641  0.0217  1.0000 

Individual mIoU  N/A  N/A  N/A  0.9709 

4.2  Evaluation  on  UAV View Planning 

We further conduct experimental validation on the UAV view planning strategy for maximal texture 

coverage proposed in Section 3.2, examining whether it outperforms existing commonly used UAV view 

planning methods designed for high -precision geometric recon struction in terms of view -dependent texture 

recovery. Prior to planning, the number of UAV viewpoints required for each case must first be determined; 

this parametric analysis is presented in Section 4.2.1. Subsequently, with the number of viewpoints esta blished, 

Section 4.2.2 compares the RefGlass -GS reconstruction results obtained using our view planning method 

against those obtained using nap -of -the -object view planning, which has demonstrated strong performance in 

geometric reconstruction, thereby vali dating the effectiveness of our approach. 

4.2.1  Parametric  Analysis 

Since the number of viewpoints is a prior parameter required as input for the optimization in Section 3.2, 

we conduct a parametric analysis on the viewpoint number to ensure appropriate and efficient image capturing. 

For both the ST and UST cases, we vary the number of viewpoints from 100 to 800 with increments of 20, 

solving the optimization formulation in Eq.  (9) with each viewpoint number as input. The most suitable number 

of viewpoints for each case is then determined by evaluating the marginal gain in  the final fitness value as the 

number of viewpoints increases. 

Fig. 1 4 illustrates the results of the parametric analysis on viewpoint number for the ST and UST cases. 

To account for the randomness inherent in the optimization process, we run the optimization three times for 

each viewpoint number in each case and take the av erage, which is displayed as the bold black line. 

Additionally, we apply a degree of smoothing to the viewpoint number versus fitness value curve to better 

identify the marginal effect of increasing the viewpoint number. As shown in Fig. 1 4, the optimized  fitness 

value increases with the number of viewpoints for both the ST and UST cases. For the ST case, the 

improvement in fitness value is relatively pronounced before 560 viewpoints and gradually levels off thereafter. 

For the UST case, 600 viewpoints mark s the point at which the optimized fitness value begins to plateau. Based 

on this parametric analysis, we select 560 viewpoints for the ST case and 600 for the UST case as the 

optimization prior input for determining the viewpoints used in second flight im age capturing. 22 

(a)  Parametric analysis of viewpoint number for the ST case 

(b)  Parametric analysis of viewpoint number for the  UST case 

Fig. 1 4. Parametric analysis of UAV viewpoint number 

4.2.2  Comparison with  View  Planning by  Nap -of -the -object 

In high -precision geometric reconstruction, nap -of -the -object (NOTO) view planning is an effective and 

commercially adopted method. Unlike two -dimensional orthophoto and three -dimensional oblique 

photogrammetry, NOTO plans UAV flight paths that closely fol low the object's surface contour  [62] . In our 

implementation, NOTO view planning is realized through the Slope Mission Plan of the DJI M3E for 

automated flight planning .

We compare the two view planning methods with the same 600 viewpoints in the UST case, as illustrated 

in Fig. 1 5. Automated UAV image acquisition is conducted for both our maximal texture coverage view 

planning and NOTO view planning within the same time period  of another test . The glass faç ade regions from 

both datasets are then extracted via 3D glass panel back -projection, and both sets of images are subsequently 

modeled using the RefGlass -GS method proposed in Section 3.3. Finally, the two resulting GS m odels are 

rendered at novel views that are excluded from the training set to evaluate the capability of each view planning 

strategy in recovering view -dependent textures.  We adopt the commonly used PSNR, SSIM  [54] , and LPIPS 23 

[63]  as comparison metrics. 

The quantitative and qualitative  comparison results are presented in Table 2 and Fig. 1 6, respectively. As 

shown by the results, our view planning substantially outperforms NOTO in view -dependent texture recovery, 

achieving an improvement of 13.15 dB in PSNR. As can be observed from Fig. 1 6, the data captured by NOTO 

suffers from severe blurring during texture rendering due to the lack of consideration for d ynamic textures. In 

contrast, our maximal texture coverage strategy is capable of recovering highly f ine -grained and detailed view -

dependent textures. 

(a) NOTO  (b)  Ours 

Fig. 1 5. Illustration of two UAV view planning strategies 

Table 2.  Quantitative  comparison results of  UAV view planning strategies 

UAV  view  planning  mode  PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

Nap -of -the -object  (NOTO)  18.44  0. 70 31  0.3006 

Maximal  texture  coverage  (Ours ) 31. 59  0.92 47 0.0 701 

Fig. 1 6. Qualitative  comparison results of UAV view planning strategies 24 

4.3  Evaluation of  RefGlass -GS  Modeling 

For the RefGlass -GS method of reflective glass faç ade  modeling  proposed in Section 3.3, we conduct 

experimental validation from three aspects. First, in Section 4.3.1, we perform a baseline comparison against 

SOTA  Gaussian Splatting methods for reflective scene reconstruction and rendering to demonstrate its 

superiority. Second, in Section 4.3.2, we explore and compare different architecture designs of the Reflection 

MLP, which is the key module responsible for rec onstructing and rendering  high -frequency near -field 

appearance in RefGlass -GS, thereby validating the rat ionality of our design. Additionally, in Section 4.3.3, we 

conduct an ablation study to verify the necessity of each component. 

4.3.1  Baseline  Comparison 

For the baselines used in comparison, we select vanilla 3DGS  [11]  and 2DGS  [20] , as well as  SOTA 

Gaussian Splatting methods specifically designed for reflective scenes and reflection recovery, including 

GaussianShader  [13] , Ref -Gaussian  [14] , and Ref -GS  [29] . Comparison experiments are conducted on both 

the ST and UST cases. For the baseline methods, we adopt their publicly available configurations and 

hyperparameter settings. For our RefGlass -GS, the number of training iterations is set to 2×10⁵. Similar to 

Section 4.2.2, we select the reflective glass faç ade regions for comparison. 

Table 3 and Fig.  17  present the quantitative and qualitative results of the baseline comparison, respectively. 

As shown by the results, our RefGlass -GS achieves superior scene  modeling  and inverse rendering in real -

world reflective glass faç ade scenarios that exhibit complex high -frequency near -field reflections. In the ST 

and UST cases, our RefGlass -GS outperforms the existing  best  method in PSNR by 5.15 dB and 5.01 dB, 

respectively. 

The superiority of our RefGlass -GS in  modeling  reflective appearance can be further examined in Fig.  17 ,

where the red dashed boxes indicate the fine -grained details successfully recovered by our method. Ref -

Gaussian is capable of partially recovering view -dependent appearance; however, it employs a 2D environment 

map to represent global illumination, which  introduces parallax errors when  modeling  real -world 3D near -

field reflections and consequently produces visibly blurred high -frequency details. Gaussian Shader similarly 

relies on a 2D environment map but adopts 3D Gaussians as primitives, with normals defined along the minor -

axis direction of each 3D Gaussian. Such a representation leads to inaccurate faç ade -surface geometry, which 

subsequently results in  erroneous reflection estimation.  Consequently, it exhibits locally chaotic appearance in 

the central region of the faç ade, or shows unstable appearance across extensive faç ade areas, which is 

attributable to poor geometric reconstruction.  For Ref -GS, although it builds upon deferred rendering of 2D 

Gaussian Splatting and applies directional encoding to the deferred -rendered surface to model view -dependent 

effects, its normal estimation fails to accurately recover the geometry of glass faç ade surfaces. This inaccuracy 

undermines the effectiveness of its spherical mip -grid based directional encoding in reconstructing the specular 

reflection effects, thereby also generating significant visual disorder across the faç ade. Furthermore, vanilla 

3D GS and 2DGS rely on spherical harmonics to represent color, which is inherently limited to capturing low -

frequency view -dependent variations and proves inadequate for reproducing high -frequency specular 

reflections. 

Table 3.  Quantitative  comparison results of  reflective glass faç ade  modeling 

Model  ST  UST 

PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

3DGS  [11]  21.98  0.8566  0.1135  22.70  0.852 1 0.1278 

2DGS  [20]  21.10  0.8474  0.1250  22.40  0.8511  0.1346 

GaussianShader  [13]  21.40  0.8350  0.1638  22.6 2 0.8402  0.1599 

Ref -Gaussian  [14]  25.0 2 0.913 9 0.0797  26.65  0.905 7 0.0930 

Ref -GS  [29]  22.49  0.8462  0.1406  23.36  0.8588  0.1399 

RefGlass -GS  (Ours)  30.17  0.9339  0.0594  31.66  0.923 7 0.0695 25 

Fig.  17 . Qualitative  comparison results of  reflective glass  faç ade s modeling 

In summary, the above comparisons confirm that our RefGlass -GS effectively  models reflective glass 

faç ade using augmented 2D Gaussian primitives and captures near -field specular reflections through a 

dedicated  Reflection MLP, collectively offering a robust solution for high -fidelity  digitization  of reflective 

glass faç ades. 

4.3.2  Comparison of Reflection MLP  Architecture  Design s

To validate the rationality of the Reflection MLP architecture designed in Section 3.3.3, we conduct a 

dedicated ablation study on the architecture of the Reflection MLP. Specifically, five factors influence the 

architecture of the Reflection MLP: (1) the  hidden layer dimension of the MLP, denoted as  Dim ; (2) the 

network depth of the MLP, denoted as  Layer ; (3) the Fourier feature encoding order applied to the position 

and reflection direction, denoted as  L; (4) whether to incorporate a skip connection that  re -injects the encoded 

position features into the network, denoted as  w/ skip  or  w/o skip ; and (5) whether to adopt the staged fusion 26 

strategy that feeds the encoded reflection direction at an intermediate layer of the network rather than 

concatenating it with the encoded position at the  initial  input, denoted as  w/ staged  or  w/o staged . We vary 

the configurations of these five factors to assess their respective influences on  modeling  quality. 

A variety of Reflection MLP architectures are assessed on the UST case, with results summarized in Table 

4. Case 4, corresponding to our final architecture configuration, attains the highest overall performance, 

confirming the effectiveness of our Reflecti on MLP design. A comparison among Cases 1, 2, and 4 reveals 

that enlarging the hidden -layer dimension and increasing the network depth are both beneficial for 

reconstructing high -frequency, view -dependent textures. The underlying reason is that the Reflect ion MLP 

functions as a high -capacity nonlinear approximator mapping spatial position and reflected direction to 

reflected color; broader layers enhance feature representational power, while additional depth strengthens the 

capacity to capture complex nonli near dependencies between location and viewing direction. The comparison 

between Cases 4 and 6 demonstrates that incorporating a skip connection to re -inject the encoded position 

features alleviates gradient forgetting throughout the training process, yiel ding a notable improvement in 

reflection recovery. The comparison between Cases 4 and 5 indicates that the staged fusion strategy decouples 

the learning of position -dependent and view -dependent features, thereby improving the accuracy of near -field 

reflect ion estimation. Furthermore, Cases 3, 4, 7, and 8 collectively suggest that a moderate increase in the 

Fourier feature encoding order facilitates the representation of high -frequency components, yet an excessively 

high encoding order leads to performance d egradation, as overly high -frequency basis functions intensify the 

network's sensitivity to minor pose inaccuracies and pixel -level noise. 

Table 4.  Quantitative  comparison results of  Reflection MLP  design 

Case  Architecture  PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

1 Dim  = 256, L ayer  = 8,  L = 12,  w/ skip , w/ staged  31.12  0.9198  0.071 4

2 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 6,  L = 12,  w/ skip , w/ staged  31. 61 0.92 32 0.06 99 

3 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 8, L = 1 0, w/ skip , w/ staged  31.62  0.923 1 0.069 8

4 Dim = 512, L ayer  = 8,  L = 12, w/ skip, w/ staged (Ours)  31.66  0.923 7 0.0695 

5 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 8,  L = 12,  w/ skip , w/ o staged  31. 51 0.92 29  0.06 99 

6 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 8,  L = 12,  w/ o skip , w/ staged  31.24  0.9199  0.0709 

7 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 8,  L = 14,  w/ skip , w/ staged  31.39  0.9211  0.0704 

8 Dim  = 512, L ayer  = 8,  L = 1 6, w/ skip , w/ staged  30.84  0.915 7 0.0736 

4.3.3  Ablation  Study 

The ablation study targets three component innovations of RefGlass -GS, namely the Reflection MLP, the 

high -frequency loss, and the normal -prior loss. Experiments are conducted on the UST case. Table 5 and Fig. 

18  present the quantitative and qualitative results of the ablation study, respectively. The results show that our 

complete RefGlass -GS achieves the best performance, validating the effectiveness of all three components. 

For the w/o Reflection MLP case in Table 5, we replace the Reflection MLP described in Section 3.3.3 

with a  standard  environment map. The results indicate that the infinite -distance lighting assumption inherent 

in the environment map introduces  noticeable  parallax errors in real -world near -field reflection scenarios, 

whereas our Reflection MLP representation effectively overcomes this limitation. 

For the w/o high -frequency loss case in Table 5, we remove the high -frequency regularization term  ℒℎ𝑓 

proposed in Section 3.3.4 and retain only the standard color loss  ℒ𝑐  that averages over the entire image for 

color supervision. The results show that, without explicit supervision on high -frequency color details, the 

training signal merely drives global average color improvement across the full image, leading to a degradat ion 

in the sharpness of fine -grained high -frequency details. 

For the w/o normal -prior loss case in Table 5, we remove the normal -prior regularization term  ℒ𝑛𝑝 

proposed in Section 3.3.4, discarding the prior geometric information  and relying solely on color signals for 

geometry reconstruction.  The results reveal that, due to inaccuracies in geometry estimation and the high 27 

sensitivity of reflection computation to surface normal orientation, errors are introduced in reflection recovery. 

Table 5.  Quantitative  results of  ablation  studies 

PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

w/o  Reflection MLP  28.25  0.9023  0.0855 

w/o  high -frequency loss  31.1 3 0.9 216 0.0 705

w/o  normal -prior loss  31.28  0.9195  0.0718 

Ours  31.66  0.923 7 0.0695 

Fig.  18 . Qualitative  results of  ablation studies 

5 Limitations and Future  Work 

Although the RefGlass -GS fusion framework proposed in this paper achieves a unification of scientific 

contribution and industrial application for reflective glass faç ade  digitization , and the extensive experiments 

in Section 4 have validated the superiority of our algorithmic and methodological innovations, the framework 

still presents certain limitations in practical applications.  First, the glass panel segmentation method in this 

paper primarily targets rectangular glass panels. While these represent the  most commonly encountered panel 

geometry in urban environments, the method's capability to segment panels of other shapes, such as triangular 

or irregular forms, remains limited.  Second, this paper mainly addresses reflective -dominant glass faç ades. For 

transmissive glass faç ades, where coupled double -layer depths exist at each observation viewpoint  [64] , the 

proposed method does not account for the reconstruction of multi -layer geometry. 

Future work will focus on extending the glass panel segmentation method to irregular panel geometries, 

thereby enhancing the generalizability of the framework. In addition, we  will  extend this semantic, 

photorealistic, and interactive  digitization  fusion framework to transmissive glass faç ades, enabling it to better 

serve the development of digital cities and smart cities. Furthermore, we intend to integrate physics -based 

simulation into the digitalized building Gaussian Splatting models  [65] , expanding their functionality beyond 

visualization and documentation to realize the vision of "what we can see is what we can simulate." 

6 Conclusion s

This paper proposes an end -to -end UAV -enabled fusion framework based on Gaussian Splatting for 

reflective glass faç ade  digitization . Driven by four practical requirements, namely  (1) individual -level  panel 

semantic segmentation,  (2)  UAV view planning for efficient and effective data collection,  (3)  effective 

modeling  of the high -frequency near -field reflections inherent on real -world faç ade surfaces, and  (4) 28 

standardized data organization for practical facility management applications and digital twin platform 

interaction, we develop four corresponding technical innovations that collectively achieve a unified 

digitization  solution encompassing photorealistic, semantic, and interactive dimensions. Regarding the four 

technical innovations, we first propose a robust individual glass panel segmentation method based on structural 

regularities maximum a posteriori estimation, en abling reliable panel -level segmentatio n under the interference 

of reflective textures and complex backgrounds. Second, we propose a maximal texture coverage UAV 

planning strategy tailored for objects with view -dependent appearance, which constructs a unit hemisphere 

physical model and formulat es the planning task as an orienteering problem  mathematical  optimization model 

to achieve efficient and comprehensive data acquisition. Third, we propose the RefGlass -GS  modeling  method, 

which builds upon augmented 2D Gaussian Splatting primitives and ach ieves high -fidelity reconstruction and 

rendering of challenging real -world reflective glass faç ades through a novel deferred shading formulation, a 

Reflection MLP, and newly developed normal -prior loss and high -frequency loss for regularization. Finally, 

we construct a general four -layer semantic organization that maps the Gaussian Splatting model from discrete 

point data to an object -based representation, supporting model loading and user interaction within practical 

digital twin platforms. 

Extensive validation experiments substantiate our contributions and demonstrate their superiority. In 

terms of glass panel segmentation, we compare our method with three  SOTA  deep learning based glass 

segmentation approaches. Our proposed method achieves an average improvement of 0.1927 in mIoU over the 

best -performing existing method in overall glass faç ade segmentation, and notably, only our method is capable 

of performing i ndividual panel -level segmentation without omissions in panel coverage. In terms o f UAV view 

planning, we compare our approach with nap -of -the -object view planning that prioritizes high -precision 

geometric reconstruction. In the task of novel view synthesis for view -dependent textures, our maximal texture 

coverage view planning achieves  an improvement of 13.15 dB in PSNR. In terms of reflection  modeling , we 

compare RefGlass -GS with five existing Gaussian Splatting  modeling  methods. In the ST and UST cases, our 

RefGlass -GS outperforms the best existing method in PSNR by 5.15 dB and 5.01 d B, respectively. In addition, 

we conduct a comparative exploration of different architecture designs for the Reflection MLP, as well as  the 

ablation study on the three key components of RefGlass -GS, collectively validating the rationality of our model 

design. 

The fusion architecture proposed in this paper encompasses both algorithmic innovation and practical 

application value, and is expected to further advance Gaussian Splatting toward real -world deployment 

scenarios in digital twin based smart city applicatio ns such as facility management .

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to acknowledge the support by RGC Theme -based Research Schemes (2023/24 

T22 -606/23 -R) , RGC Theme -based Research Schemes  (2024/25 T22 -607/24 -N) , Strategic Public Policy 

Research Funding Scheme (S2024.A7.022) , and  RGC  Early Career Scheme  (Project No. 9048329 ). The 

authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 

appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

References                            

> [1] Y. Lv, Y. Pang, L. Ju, W. Xu, Z. Liang, J. He, L. Zhang, Automating digitization of engineered slopes to support
> interactive digital twin visualization, Automation in Construction 181 (2026) 106564.
> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106564
> [2] V. Mousavi, M. Rashidi, G. Shayan, B. Samali, A data -driven digital twin model for bridge health monitoring
> using feature fusion and unsupervised deep learning, Information Fusion (2025) 103534.
> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2025.103534
> [3] B. Wang, F. Lin, M. Li, Z. Liang, Z. Chen, M. Wang, J.C. Cheng, Informative as -built modeling as a foundation
> for digital twins based on fine -grained object recognition and object -aware scan -vs -BIM for MEP scenes,
> Advanced Engineering Informatics 65 (2025) 103382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2025.103382

29 

[4]  J.L. Schonberger, J. -M. Frahm, Structure -from -motion revisited, Proceedings of the IEEE conference on 

computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 4104 -4113.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.445 

[5]  C. Yin, H. Yue, Q. Han, D. Hu, Z. Liang, F. Lin, B. Sun, B. Wang, M. Li, W. Yao, Industrial3D: A Terrestrial 

LiDAR Point Cloud Dataset and CrossParadigm Benchmark for Industrial Infrastructure, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2603.28660 (2026).  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.28660 

[6]  H. He, X. Li, G. Cheng, J. Shi, Y. Tong, G. Meng, V. Prinet, L. Weng, Enhanced boundary learning for glass -

like object segmentation, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 

15859 -15868.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01556 

[7]  T. Yan, J. Gao, K. Xu, X. Zhu, H. Huang, H. Li, B. Wah, R.W. Lau, Ghostingnet: A novel approach for glass 

surface detection with ghosting cues, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47 (1) 

(2024) 323 -337.  https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3463490 

[8]  J. Lin, Y. -H. Yeung, R. Lau, Exploiting semantic relations for glass surface detection, Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems 35 (2022) 22490 -22504.  https://openreview.net/forum?id=WrIrYMCZgbb 

[9]  J.C.F. Chan, P.K. -Y. WONG, X. Guo, Z. Liang, Y. Wu, J.C. Cheng, Enhancing Vision -Language Model for 

Construction Safety Inspection via Visually Grounded Reasoning and Reinforcement Learning, Available at 

SSRN 6294267.  https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.6294267 

[10]  B. Mildenhall, P.P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J.T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, R. Ng, NeRF: Representing Scenes as 

Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis, European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2020, pp. 

405 -421.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -58452 -8_24 

[11]  B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkü hler, G. Drettakis, 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real -Time Radiance Field 

Rendering, ACM Transactions on Graphics 42 (4) (2023) 1 -14.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3592433 

[12]  Z. Li, S. Yao, Y. Chu, A.F. Garcia -Fernandez, Y. Yue, W. Ding, X. Zhu, Mvg -splatting: Multi -view guided 

gaussian splatting with adaptive quantile -based geometric consistency densification, Information Fusion (2025) 

103540.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2025.103540 

[13]  Y. Jiang, J. Tu, Y. Liu, X. Gao, X. Long, W. Wang, Y. Ma, Gaussianshader: 3d gaussian splatting with shading 

functions for reflective surfaces, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern 

recognition, 2024, pp. 5322 -5332.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.00509 

[14]  Y. Yao, Z. Zeng, C. Gu, X. Zhu, L. Zhang, Reflective Gaussian Splatting, The Thirteenth International 

Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.  https://openreview.net/forum?id=xPxHQHDH2u 

[15]  K. Ye, Q. Hou, K. Zhou, 3d gaussian splatting with deferred reflection, ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference 

Papers, 2024, pp. 1 -10.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657456 

[16]  C. Gu, X. Wei, Z. Zeng, Y. Yao, L. Zhang, Irgs: Inter -reflective gaussian splatting with 2d gaussian ray tracing, 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 10943 -10952. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.01022 

[17]  Z. Liang, Z. Liang, M. Wang, L. Yang, J.C. Cheng, A Novel UAV View Planning Strategy for High Quality 3D 

Reconstruction of Irregular -Shaped Architecture, International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building 

Engineering, Springer, 2024, pp. 573 -585 . https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -84208 -5_42 

[18]  R. Jin, Y. Gao, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, H. Lu, C. Xu, F. Gao, Gs -planner: A gaussian -splatting -based planning 

framework for active high -fidelity reconstruction, 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1120 2-11209.  https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10801715 

[19]  S. Matarneh, F. Elghaish, F.P. Rahimian, N. Dawood, D. Edwards, Automated and interconnected facility 

management system: An open IFC cloud -based BIM solution, Automation in Construction 143 (2022) 104569. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104569 

[20]  B. Huang, Z. Yu, A. Chen, A. Geiger, S. Gao, 2d gaussian splatting for geometrically accurate radiance fields, 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 conference papers, 2024, pp. 1 -11.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657428 

[21]  M. Ye, M. Danelljan, F. Yu, L. Ke, Gaussian grouping: Segment and edit anything in 3d scenes, European 

conference on computer vision, Springer, 2024, pp. 162 -179.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -73397 -0_10 

[22]  A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A.C. Berg, W. -Y. 

Lo, Segment anything, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2023, pp. 

4015 -4026.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.00371 

[23]  M. Qin, W. Li, J. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Pfister, Langsplat: 3d language gaussian splatting, Proceedings of the 

IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20051 -20060. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01895 30 

[24]  Z. Liang, J.C.F. Chan, J. Zhang, Z. Liang, B. Wang, M. Wang, J.C. Cheng, Multimodal LLM -driven language -

embedded 3D gaussian splatting for semantic and realistic digitization of historical buildings, Automation in 

Construction 181 (2026) 106628.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106628 

[25]  A. Radford, J.W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, 

Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, International conference on machine 

learning, PmLR, 2021, pp. 8748 -8763.  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html 

[26]  M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. Jé gou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, Emerging properties in self -

supervised vision transformers, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 

2021, pp. 9650 -9660.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00951 

[27]  W. Zhang, J. Tang, W. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. -S. Liu, Z. Han, MaterialRefGS: Reflective Gaussian Splatting with 

Multi -view Consistent Material Inference, The Thirty -ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information 

Processing Systems, 2025.  https://openreview.net/forum?id=I64ZLbUP6u 

[28]  J. Tang, F. Fei, Z. Li, X. Tang, S. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Huang, Z. Chen, X. Wu, B. Shi, SpecTRe -GS:  Modeling 

Highly Specular Surfaces with Reflected Nearby Objects by Tracing Rays in 3D Gaussian Splatting, 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 16133 -16142. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.01504 

[29]  Y. Zhang, A. Chen, Y. Wan, Z. Song, J. Yu, Y. Luo, W. Yang, Ref -gs: Directional factorization for 2d gaussian 

splatting, Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 26483 -26492. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.02466 

[30]  H. Mei, X. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, S. He, Q. Zhang, X. Wei, R.W. Lau, Don't hit me! glass detection in real -

world scenes, Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 

3687 -3696.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00374 

[31]  K. Fan, C. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Wang, R. Yi, L. Ma, RFENet: towards reciprocal feature evolution for glass 

segmentation, Proceedings of the Thirty -Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023, 

pp. 717 -725.  https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/80 

[32]  J. Lin, Z. He, R.W. Lau, Rich context aggregation with reflection prior for glass surface detection, Proceedings 

of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 13415 -13424. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01321 

[33]  M.E.M. Gonzales, L.C. Uy, J.P. Ilao, Designing a Lightweight Edge -Guided Convolutional Neural Network for 

Segmenting Mirrors and Reflective Surfaces, Proceedings of International Conference in Central Europe on 

Computer Graphics, Visualization and Comput er Vision, 2023.  https://www.doi.org/10.24132/CSRN.3301.14 

[34]  A.Y. Hassen, M. Arashpour, E. Abdi, Lightweight segmentation model for automated facade installation in high -

rise buildings, Advanced Engineering Informatics 65 (2025) 103374.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2025.103374 

[35]  D. Wu, L. Cheng, R. Li, P. Yang, X. Xu, X. Wang, C. -H. Lee, Automatic segmentation of curtain wall frame 

using a context collaboration pyramid network, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 

108309.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108309 

[36]  Y. Tian, F. Lin, Y. Li, T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Fu, J. Huang, X. Dai, Y. Wang, C. Tian, UAVs meet LLMs: 

Overviews and perspectives towards agentic low -altitude mobility, Information Fusion 122 (2025) 103158. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2025.103158 

[37]  Z. Liang, H. Li, H. Wu, P. Kok -Yiu Wong, F. Lin, Z. Liang, J.C. Cheng, A 3D  Modeling  Approach Based on 

UAV -Captured Low -Light Images, Computing in Civil Engineering 2024, pp. 680 -691. 

https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784486122.076 

[38]  Z. Liang, L. Yang, Z. Liang, J.C.F. Chan, Z. Zhang, M. Wang, J.C. Cheng, Optimized UAV view planning for 

high -quality 3D reconstruction of buildings using a modified sparrow search algorithm, Advanced Engineering 

Informatics 65 (2025) 103344.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2025.103344 

[39]  C. Peng, V. Isler, Adaptive view planning for aerial 3D reconstruction, 2019 International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 2981 -2987.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2019.8793532 

[40]  Z. Shang, Z. Shen, Topology -based UAV path planning for multi -view stereo 3D reconstruction of complex 

structures, Complex & Intelligent Systems 9 (1) (2023) 909 -926.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747 -022 -00831 -5

[41]  X. Zheng, F. Wang, Z. Li, A multi -UAV cooperative route planning methodology for 3D fine -resolution building 

model reconstruction, ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 146 (2018) 483 -494. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2018.11.004 

[42]  B. Hepp, M. Nieß ner, O. Hilliges, Plan3d: Viewpoint and trajectory optimization for aerial multi -view stereo 

reconstruction, ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38 (1) (2018) 1 -17.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3233794 31 

[43]  S. Zhang, C. Liu, N. Haala, Guided by model quality: UAV path planning for complete and precise 3D 

reconstruction of complex buildings, International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 

127 (2024) 103667.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2024.103667 

[44]  F. Wang, Y. Zou, E. del Rey Castillo, Y. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Zhao, J.B. Lim, Automated UAV path -planning for 

high -quality photogrammetric 3D bridge reconstruction, Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 20 (10) (2024) 

1595 -1614.  https://doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2022.2152840 

[45]  X. Liu, W. Yi, P. Chen, Y. Tan, Flight path planning of UAV -driven refinement inspection for construction sites 

based on 3D reconstruction, Automation in Construction 177 (2025) 106360. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106360 

[46]  Z. Xu, R. Jin, K. Wu, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, F. Gao, Z. Gan, W. Ding, Hgs -planner: Hierarchical planning 

framework for active scene reconstruction using 3d gaussian splatting, 2025 IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEE E, 2025, pp. 14161 -14167. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA55743.2025.11127649 

[47]  L. Jin, X. Zhong, Y. Pan, J. Behley, C. Stachniss, M. Popović, Activegs: Active scene reconstruction using 

gaussian splatting, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2025).  https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2025.3555149 

[48]  Y. Li, Z. Kuang, T. Li, Q. Hao, Z. Yan, G. Zhou, S. Zhang, Activesplat: High -fidelity scene reconstruction 

through active gaussian splatting, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2025). 

https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2025.3580331 

[49]  C. -Y. Wu, Y. -C. Sun, C. -T. Lee, C. -H. Hsu, Optimally Planning Drone Trajectories to Capture 3D Gaussian 

Splatting Objects, International Conference on Multimedia  Modeling , Springer, 2024, pp. 171 -185. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -981 -96 -2064 -7_13 

[50]  Z. Liang, X. Zhang, Z. Liang, B. Wang, M. Wang, J.C. Cheng, A Novel Framework for Generating Realistic 

and Semantic Digital Model of Reflective Glass Faç ades Using RefGlass -3DGS, Computing in Civil 

Engineering 2025: Computational and Intelligent Technolo gies, pp. 914 -923. 

https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784486436.098 

[51]  G. Luká cs, R. Martin, D. Marshall, Faithful least -squares fitting of spheres, cylinders, cones and tori for reliable 

segmentation, European conference on computer vision, Springer, 1998, pp. 671 -686. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0055697 

[52]  C. Galamhos, J. Matas, J. Kittler, Progressive probabilistic Hough transform for line detection, Proceedings. 

1999 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (Cat. No PR00149), Vol. 1, 

IEEE, 1999, pp. 554 -560.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.1999.786993 

[53]  K. Teeravech, M. Nagai, K. Honda, M. Dailey, Discovering repetitive patterns in facade images using a 

RANSAC -style algorithm, ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 92 (2014) 38 -53. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.02.018 

[54]  Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, E.P. Simoncelli, Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural 

similarity, IEEE transactions on image processing 13 (4) (2004) 600 -612. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2003.819861 

[55]  M. Maboudi, M. Homaei, S. Song, S. Malihi, M. Saadatseresht, M. Gerke, A review on viewpoints and path 

planning for UAV -based 3 -D reconstruction, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations 

and Remote Sensing 16 (2023) 5026 -5048.  https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2023.3276427 

[56]  J. Kennedy, R. Eberhart, Particle swarm optimization, Proceedings of ICNN'95 -international conference on 

neural networks, Vol. 4, ieee, 1995, pp. 1942 -1948.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNN.1995.488968 

[57]  N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, On the spectral 

bias of neural networks, International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 5301 -5310. 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/rahaman19a.html 

[58]  M. Tancik, P. Srinivasan, B. Mildenhall, S. Fridovich -Keil, N. Raghavan, U. Singhal, R. Ramamoorthi, J. Barron, 

R. Ng, Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains, Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Syste ms 33 (2020) 7537 -7547. 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/55053683268957697aa39fba6f231c68 -Paper.pdf 

[59]  B. Wang, F. Lin, M. Li, Z. Liang, H. Yue, Q. Wang, J.C. Cheng, Aligning as -built and as -designed: Local point 

cloud to BIM registration via hybrid visibility map encoding for construction digital twins, Automation in 

Construction 180 (2025) 106551.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106551 

[60]  Z. He, Y. -H. Wang, J. Zhang, Generative AIBIM: An automatic and intelligent structural design pipeline 

integrating BIM and generative AI, Information Fusion 114 (2025) 102654. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102654 32 

[61]  B. Wang, Z. Chen, M. Li, Q. Wang, C. Yin, J.C. Cheng, Omni -Scan2BIM: A ready -to -use Scan2BIM approach 

based on vision foundation models for MEP scenes, Automation in Construction 162 (2024) 105384. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105384 

[62]  M. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Song, Y. Li, F. Wang, S. Wang, D. Liu, Proposition of UAV multi -angle nap -of -the -object 

image acquisition framework based on a quality evaluation system for a 3D real scene model of a high -steep 

rock slope, International Journal of Ap plied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 125 (2023) 103558. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2023.103558 

[63]  R. Zhang, P. Isola, A.A. Efros, E. Shechtman, O. Wang, The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a 

perceptual metric, Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 

586 -595.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00068 

[64]  Z. Liang, X. Zhang, T. Li, J.C. Cheng, C. -K. Tang, TransmissiveGS: Residual -Guided Disentangled Gaussian 

Splatting for Transmissive Scene Reconstruction and Rendering, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10705 (2026). 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.10705 

[65]  Z. Liang, J.C. Cheng, UAV -Assisted Scan -to -Simulation for Landslides Using Physics -Informed Gaussian 

Splatting, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10715 (2026).  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.10715