Title: UniPR: Unified Object-level Real-to-Sim Perception and Reconstruction from a Single Stereo Pair

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19616v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:28:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# UniPR: Unified Object-level Real-to-Sim Perception and Reconstruction from a Single Stereo Pair 

## Chuanrui Zhang 1,2∗ Yingshuang Zou 4∗ Zhengxian Wu 5∗ Yonggen Ling 2,3†

## Yuxiao Yang 5 Ziwei Wang 1

> 1

## NTU 2Tencent Robotics X 3Futian Laboratory 4HKUST 5THU 

## https://xingyoujun.github.io/unipr How to improve efficiency? 

> Input

…    

> N samples ×NNmeshes

…

> …
> Segmentation

UniPR 

Img -to -3D   

> Single inference
> Multiple inferences

UniPR process the entire scene 

with a single inference .

> Segmentation
> Input

Hunyuan2.1 

UniPR 

Img -to -3D  

> Inherent limitations
> Original shape proportion

How to preserve shape proportion? 

UniPR achieves real -scale shape proportion 

through geometric constraints.   

> Real proportion
> Error proportion
> Efficient & Fast
> Poor efficiency

Figure 1. UniPR enables efficient full-scene processing and produces real-scale, physically consistent object shapes by leveraging geomet-ric constraints, outperforming traditional image-to-3D reconstruction models. As the first fully end-to-end method, UniPR achieves up to 100× faster generation and delivers 3x improvements in shape-proportion accuracy compared with SOTA mehtods. 

## Abstract 

Perceiving and reconstructing objects from images are crit-ical for real-to-sim transfer tasks, which are widely used in the robotics community. Existing methods rely on multi-ple submodules such as detection, segmentation, shape re-construction, and pose estimation to complete the pipeline. However, such modular pipelines suffer from inefficiency and cumulative error, as each stage operates on only par-tial or locally refined information while discarding global context. To address these limitations, we propose UniPR ,the first end-to-end object-level real-to-sim perception and reconstruction framework. Operating directly on a single stereo image pair, UniPR leverages geometric constraints to resolve the scale ambiguity. We introduce Pose-Aware Shape Representation to eliminate the need for per-category canonical definitions and to bridge the gap between recon-struction and pose estimation tasks. Furthermore, we con-struct a large-vocabulary stereo dataset, LVS6D, compris-  

> ∗Equal contribution. †Project leader. Corresponding authors. Work was done at Tencent Robotics X.

ing over 6,300 objects, to facilitate large-scale research in this area. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UniPR reconstructs all objects in a scene in parallel within a single forward pass, achieving significant efficiency gains and pre-serves true physical proportions across diverse object types, highlighting its potential for practical robotic applications. 

## 1. Introduction 

Accurate perception and reconstruction of real-world ob-jects are fundamental to robot manipulation [9, 15, 41] and scene understanding [14, 19, 42, 44, 45]. These applica-tions require not only visual fidelity but also physical ac-curacy in object geometry and position to ensure reliable interaction between real and simulator. However, existing approaches typically decompose this process into isolated modules, such as detection, segmentation, shape recon-struction and pose estimation, which suffer from error prop-agation, computational inefficiency, and inconsistent shape proportion across the pipeline. This work aims to bridge this critical gap by proposing a unified framework that di-rectly transforms raw sensor inputs into physically accurate 3D reconstructions, preserving true object proportions and 1                

> arXiv:2603.19616v1 [cs.CV] 20 Mar 2026 (b) End -to -End (UniPR )
> (a) Classical Pipeline
> 2D Detection Segmentation Pose Estimation Shape Reconstruction
> Bounding box Seg Mask Align Input
> Z
> Y
> X
> Shape
> Position
> CSR
> PASR
> (c) Comparison between CSR and PASR

,{ }    

> Z
> YX
> Perception Object Query Position Decoder
> Geometry Decoder
> backpropagation
> Input
> Z
> Y
> X
> Shape
> Position

Figure 2. Comparison between our end-to-end approach and the classical pipeline. Our method enables information to flow seamlessly across all components, allowing the network to leverage the full-image context for shape reconstruction. This end-to-end design effectively handles occlusion and significantly improves the preservation of true shape proportions compared to classical, modular pipelines. 

spatial relationships for seamless real-to-sim transfer. Current approaches to object-level real-to-sim recon-struction can be broadly categorized into three types, each exhibiting fundamental limitations in achieving scalable physical accuracy. Instance-level methods [18, 29, 35] rely on CAD models or multi-view images to reconstruct ob-jects using NeRF[24] and subsequently predict the relative pose with respect to the corresponding object model. How-ever, such reliance on object-specific priors severely con-strains their generalization ability to unseen objects, partic-ularly in the absence of multi-view scans. Category-level approaches [8, 28, 31] reconstruct object shapes within pre-defined canonical spaces while simultaneously predicting relative poses. However, their reliance on category-specific shape priors severely limits practical scalability as most methods handle fewer than six categories because defining canonical spaces and accommodating large intra-class vari-ations is inherently challenging. Recently, large-scale 3D generative models [11, 34] have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot capability and high vi-sual fidelity. Combining instance-level methods with ob-ject geometries reconstructed from large image-to-3D mod-els [7] has emerged as a promising direction for real-to-sim transfer of unseen objects. However, image-to-3D methods often struggle to preserve shape proportion, as they gener-ate object meshes solely from visual inputs lacking metric information. Furthermore, these methods can typically han-dle only a single object at a time, limiting their applicability to complex scenes containing multiple objects, as shown in Figure 1. Crucially, most existing pipelines require prede-fined object bounding boxes and segmentation masks, lead-ing to error propagation and computational inefficiency. Furthermore, monocular approaches [7, 8] inherently suffer from scale ambiguity, making it impossible to ob-tain the metric-accurate reconstructions required for robotic manipulation. In contrast, stereo vision provides the geo-metric constraints necessary to resolve this ambiguity and preserve object shape proportions, forming a robust foun-dation for reliable real-to-sim transfer that maintains both geometric fidelity and metric accuracy [3, 20, 40]. To overcome the limitations of existing approaches, we propose a unified end-to-end framework that seam-lessly integrates perception and reconstruction for real-to-simulation transfer, as illustrated in Figure 2(ab). At the core of this framework is the Pose-Aware Shape Represen-tation (PASR), which jointly encodes object pose and geom-etry directly in the observation space. This design removes the dependence on predefined canonical spaces and enables tight coupling between pose estimation and shape recon-struction, as shown in Figure 2(c). This representation en-ables the direct prediction of physically accurate 3D shapes aligned with true world coordinates, effectively removing the error-prone decoupling between pose estimation and shape reconstruction. Building upon this representation, we introduce UniPR , a single-forward pipeline that processes raw stereo images to simultaneously detect multiple objects and reconstruct their 3D geometries in parallel. Unlike tra-ditional sequential pipelines that handle objects individu-ally after detection and segmentation, our framework pro-cesses all scene objects concurrently through object queries in a transformer decoder, thereby achieving substantial im-provements in computational efficiency and mitigating error accumulation. The stereo-based design provides essential geometric cues that resolve the scale ambiguities inherent in monocular methods, ensuring that reconstructed objects maintain accurate positions and shape proportions. To validate our approach, we construct LVS6D , a large-scale stereo dataset encompassing over 6,300 diverse ob-jects, which demonstrates the scalability of our represen-tation without the need for predefined canonical spaces. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate UniPR achieves superior shape proportion accuracy compared to generative 3D models such as HunYuan3D [11] and Trellis [34], even when provided with identical 2D masks and poses. Fur-thermore, our framework efficiently processes multiple ob-jects in parallel, achieving up to a 100× speed-up, while ex-hibiting robust generalization to real-world scenes and un-seen object categories. These capabilities enable direct de-ployment in robotic manipulation tasks that demand precise physical alignment between real and reconstructed objects, as confirmed through extensive real-world experiments. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: 

• We introduce the first end-to-end real-to-sim perception-reconstruction framework, eliminating intermediate mod-2ules and preventing error propagation. 

• We propose PASR, which enables seamless scaling to hundreds of object categories while preserving true phys-ical proportions and spatial relationships. 

• Our framework supports parallel batch processing of mul-tiple objects in a single forward pass, substantially im-proving computational efficiency. 

• We construct LVS6D, a large-scale stereo dataset with di-verse object geometries for real-to-sim transfer tasks. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. 3D Object Reconstruction 

Current 3D reconstruction methods continue to face chal-lenges in achieving both physical accuracy and computa-tional efficiency. Stereo and multi-view approaches [12, 13, 18, 40] can recover metric scale by exploiting geomet-ric principles such as triangulation from calibrated cam-era pairs. However, these methods typically require multi-view images for NeRF-based [24] reconstruction or rely on category-level shape priors as generative templates, which limits their efficiency in real-to-simulation transfer and hin-ders generalization to novel objects. Recently, large-scale generative models [11, 34, 36, 37] have demonstrated re-markable zero-shot visual fidelity. These methods lever-age voxel- or vector-set–based latent representations to model object geometry and employ diffusion transform-ers [26] conditioned on images to generate novel 3D in-stances. However, they inherit the intrinsic scale ambiguity of monocular inputs and exhibit limited accuracy in pre-serving object shape proportions. Moreover, these models typically process only a single object at a time and depend on upstream modules such as segmentation masks, which reintroduce error propagation and restrict their applicability to complex scenes. In contrast, our framework introduces a unified end-to-end pipeline that integrates stereo geometric constraints to simultaneously detect and reconstruct multi-ple physically accurate objects, ensuring metric precision essential for real-world interaction. 

2.2. Object-level Real-to-sim Transfer 

Object-level real-to-simulation transfer aims to bridge the physical and virtual worlds by accurately reconstructing real-world objects with precise geometry, position, and scale for direct deployment in simulation environments [8, 9, 15]. Early approaches relied on instance-level re-construction using accurate CAD models or multi-view scans [18, 29, 32, 40], with object poses estimated rela-tive to predefined models. To enhance generalization, the field advanced toward category-level understanding through frameworks such as the Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) [31], which established a unified canonical space for objects within the same category. Recent meth-ods [12, 30, 40] further extended this paradigm by model-ing deformations from category-specific shape priors, en-abling joint pose and shape estimation for novel instances within known categories. However, these approaches re-main constrained by their reliance on predefined canonical spaces, limiting practical scalability to fewer than six cat-egories due to the challenges of defining canonical orien-tations and handling intra-class variations [43]. Recent ad-vances explore zero-shot novel object reconstruction. Meth-ods like Any6D [18] achieve impressive single-object re-construction without category constraints, while OnePose-ViaGen [7] leverages large-scale image-to-3D generative models to reconstruct object geometry before estimating pose. Despite their visual quality, these methods typically process objects sequentially after 2D detection and segmen-tation, suffer from scale ambiguity in monocular settings, and fail to preserve true object proportions, resulting in limited physical accuracy. In contrast to these fragmented pipelines, our work introduces the first unified end-to-end framework that simultaneously detects multiple objects and reconstructs their physically accurate 3D shapes. 

2.3. Datasets for Object-level Real-to-sim Transfer 

The NOCS dataset [31], which encompasses the CAMERA and REAL datasets, is the most widely utilized for category-level object pose estimation and shape reconstruction tasks. CAMERA includes 6 categories with 1085 object instances, and REAL, mirroring CAMERA’s categories, contains 42 instances. The Wild6D dataset [6] comprises 5166 videos and 1.1 million images, spanning 1722 object instances across 5 categories. However, the limited category range in these datasets restricts their real-world generalization capa-bilities [6, 38]. Building on these, the Omni6D dataset [43] offers sophisticated instance-level rotational invariance an-notations for a wider range of 166 categories and 4688 in-stances. However, the process of annotating such rotation invariance is arduous and the datasets grapple with ambigui-ties in the alignment of functional and geometric properties, impeding their expansion to real-world contexts. Contrast-ingly, our method presents an innovative annotation that in-tegrates object shape and pose, sidelining the requirement for predefined category-level canonical spaces and greatly easing dataset expansion. Notably, our dataset readily en-compasses 192 categories and over 6,300 instances. 

## 3. Method 

We introduce a single-forward network named UniPR , that infers object position, size and pose-aware 3D shape from stereo images. An overview of our method is illustrated in Fig. 3. Formally, given stereo images as input, UniPR extracts 2D stereo features using DINOv2 [25]. We then utilize a triplane-view representation as the global spa-tial framework to effectively aggregate stereo information. Next, the transformer decoder generates expressive object embeddings, which are subsequently used to predict the object’s position, scale, and shape embeddings. Finally, 3/ / Triplane -view Feature     

> Transformer
> Decoder
> 3D
> MLP
> Shape
> MLP unwrap
> ...  Shape
> Decoder
> Initial TP Queries
> Q
> Q
> KV
> Feature Extractor
> Transformer
> Encoder
> Score
> MLP
> Position : (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑧 )
> Scale :
> s
> score
> CLIP Category set “glasses box ”
> Project

...    

> KV
> DINO -v2 Feature Object Query Object Embedding Shape Embedding
> Input
> T!"
> T!#
> T"#

Figure 3. Overview of Our Proposed UniPR. We present UniPR, a single-forward network capable of simultaneously processing multiple unknown objects. Taking stereo image pairs as input, UniPR first encodes the scene into Tri-Plane View features that comprehensively capture spatial and geometric information. Within the transformer decoder, object queries are employed to extract instance-specific features from these TPV embeddings, enabling the network to reason about multiple objects in parallel. The resulting object embeddings are then fed into specialized prediction heads to infer each object’s semantic label, 3D position, physical scale, and pose-aware shape representation. 

the shape decoder reconstructs the object’s pose-aware 3D shape. To obtain the shape embedding and decoder, we first train a pose-aware shape Variational Auto Encoder (VAE). Our VAE encodes rotated objects into compact object shape embeddings and decodes them into object occupancy. The pretrained VAE decoder is then integrated into the UniPR pipeline as the shape decoder. 

3.1. Pose-Aware Shape VAE 

We first introduce our proposed pose-aware shape VAE. Un-like previous shape VAEs [16, 39], our approach focuses on rotated objects and utilizes a more lightweight object em-bedding, which is critical for our detection pipeline. Tra-ditional cubic voxel space encounters challenges when ob-jects are rotated, as objects normalized to a unit cube may extend beyond this boundary upon rotation. Re-normalizing rotated objects within a cubic voxel space can lead to scale ambiguities, where the perceived scale varies with the ob-ject’s rotation. To address this limitation, we introduce a 

spherical voxel space that normalizes objects using a unit sphere. This approach ensures that objects remain within the defined boundary regardless of their rotation, effectively preventing ambiguities in shape representation. Given the surface point cloud Psurface ∈ RN ×3 of ob-ject, we first apply positional embeddings to generate sur-face embeddings zsurface ∈ RN ×C . Since these surface em-beddings are high-dimensional and cannot be directly inte-grated into the detection pipeline, we aim to compress them to an object-level representation. We initialize an object em-bedding zobject ∈ RC and employ cross-attention layers to learn a mapping from surface to object embeddings. 

zobject = CrossAttn( zobject , zsurface ) (1) Next, we utilize two multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to pre-dict the mean μ ∈ RCkl and variance σ2 ∈ RCkl , forming a Gaussian distribution. We then apply KL regularization to ensure effective representation and project the embeddings into a lower-dimensional latent space. For the decoder DVAE , we aim to compute the occu-pancy probability for each query point Pquery ∈ RN ×3

in order to recover the object shape. Firstly, We randomly sample an object latent embedding zsampled ∈ RCkl from the Gaussian distribution (μ, σ 2) obtained from the encoder. 

zsampled = μ + σ · ϵ (2) where ϵ ∼ N (0 , 1) . We then use a cross-attention mecha-nism to transform the sampled embedding zsampled into sur-face embeddings ˆzsurface ∈ RN ×C to recover the original surface distribution. To further enhance the representation ability, we apply several self-attention blocks to enhance the point embeddings. We then utilize positional embeddings to generate query embeddings zquery and use cross-attention to map the surface distribution to the query embeddings. 

zquery = CrossAttn( zquery , ˆzpoints ) (3) Finally, we employ an MLP to project the query point em-beddings into occupancy values. 

O(x, y, z ) = ϕ(zquery (x, y, z ))  (4) where O(x, y, z ) denotes the occupancy values of point 

(x, y, z ) in the spherical voxel space and ϕ is MLP layers. 

3.2. Triplane Encoder 

In this section, we introduce the information encoder mod-ule of our proposed UniPR. We employ a triplane mecha-nism [10] to aggregate stereo features into a global coordi-nate system. Specifically, we initialize the Triplane-View (TPV) feature representation T = [TUV , TUD , TVD ],where TUV ∈ RU ×V ×C , TUD ∈ RU ×D×C , TVD ∈

RV ×D×C . Here, U and V denote the image plane dimen-sions, while D represents depth dimension. We construct the UVD space, which is better suited for object detection 4in camera space, facilitating accurate object representation and matching within the global coordinate framework. Given the initialized TPV, we apply stereo cross-attention to lift stereo features onto TPV planes. For a voxel grid located at (u, v, d ) in UVD space, we aim to update the feature T(u, v, d ) by separately refining TUV (u, v ),

TUD (u, d ), TVD (v, d ). To achieve this, we first backpro-ject each voxel to determine the corresponding pixel in the stereo images. Leveraging the UVD space, we first obtain the pixel coordinates, after which we update the TPV fea-tures using stereo cross-attention, as described in Eq. (5). 

T(u, v, d ) = F(T(u, v, d ), Fl(ul, v l), Fr (ur , v r ))  (5) where Fl, Fr ∈ RH×W ×C denote the features extracted from the left and right stereo images, respectively. The function F represents stereo cross-attention which gener-ates attention weights based on the TPV features to aggre-gate stereo image features effectively. Additionally, we ap-ply self-attention to fuse information across the three TPV planes, enhancing the overall TPV representation. This combination of self-attention and cross-attention modules is repeated N times, corresponding to N encoder layers. 

3.3. Object Embedding Decoder 

We aim to generate object embeddings that encapsulate all relevant information about the corresponding objects, in-cluding position, scale, and 3D shape, and then decode these information from the object embeddings as the net-work’s output. To achieve this, we adopt the standard trans-former decoder structure from DETR [1], which consists of L decoder layers. Each layer includes three key com-ponents: a self-attention module to facilitate interactions among object queries, a cross-attention module to integrate stereo-aware image features, and a feed-forward network (FFN) to update the object queries. We employ multi-head attention to perform these attention operations effectively. Through iterative interactions across the decoder layers, the model generates object embeddings that capture high-level representations. We present a 3D MLP to regress the object’s position (x, y, z ) and scale s, and a shape MLP to generate the shape embedding distribution (μ, σ 2). Here, the shape embedding distribution follows a KL-regularized Gaussian distribution, as discussed in Sec. 3.1. Finally, we obtain the object point cloud prediction by calculating the occupancy of spherical query points through the pre-trained shape decoder. Combining position, scale, and 3D shape, we can retrieve the object shape in camera coordi-nates, which can further guide robot manipulation tasks. Additionally, we eliminate the classification head used in previous work [40], as we find that the classification head may degrade object detection results, especially for cate-gories that are difficult to distinguish. Instead, we utilize the CLIP model [27] to determine the correct category from the preset categories using the 2D bounding box, which is the 2D projection of the 3D location result. During infer-ence, we regress the object confidence score to determine whether the object query corresponds to a valid object. 

3.4. Training Loss 

To train the pose-aware shape VAE, we optimize the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss for the occupancy prediction of the input query points, following prior works [23, 39]: 

Lrecon = BCE( ˆO(X), O(X))  (6) where X represents the input query points, and ˆO, O denote the predicted and ground truth occupancy values of these points. We also employ KL regularization as the KL loss with respect to the standard Gaussian distribution: 

Lkl −reg = 1

Ckl 

> Ckl

X

> j=1

12 (ˆ μ2 + ˆ σ2 − log ˆσ2) (7) where (ˆ μ, ˆσ2) denotes the encoded shape distribution. In the main detection pipeline, UniPR supervises the learning of object position (x, y, z ), scale s, and shape em-bedding distribution (μ, σ 2). Similar to the approach used in DETR [1], we apply the Hungarian algorithm [17] for one-to-one matching between ground truth and predicted values. For the position and scale supervision, we employ L1 loss to measure the discrepancies. We utilize KL regularization to quantify the distance between the ground truth shape distri-bution and the predicted distribution, as detailed in Eq. (8). 

Lkl = 1

Ckl Ckl X

> j=1

12 ( (ˆ μ − μ)2 + ˆ σ2

σ2 − log ˆσ2 + logσ 2) (8) where (ˆ μ, ˆσ2) denotes the predicted distribution and (μ, σ 2)

is the ground truth. The loss for detection pipeline can be summarized as follows: 

Ldetection = Lposition + Lscale + λshape × L shape  (9) where λshape is a hyperparameter used to balance the con-tribution of the shape loss in the overall loss function. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setup 

Dataset In this work, we introduce a Large-Vocabulary 

Stereo category-level object dataset for object 6D pose es-timation and shape reconstruction, named LVS6D . This dataset incorporates 3D models from OmniObject3D [33] and Google Scanned Objects [5]. We generate approxi-mately 0.4M stereo images for training and 1,000 images for testing, using over 500 HDRI backgrounds. To facilitate a more intuitive comparison, we divide the test categories into Easy, Medium, and Hard subsets based on the object 5Method Requirement CD ↓ CD@Top10 ↓ F-Score ↑ SPE ↓ Inference Time (s)                                                                                   

> 2D Seg Pose Single Whole Image Trellis [34] ✓✓✓0.1096 0.0220 0.334 0.475 8.62 43.08 Hunyuan2.1 [11] ✓✓✓0.0644 0.0072 0.553 0.320 74.16 370.78 Ours ✗✗✗0.0083 0.0026 0.883 0.109 0.63 0.63
> Table 1. Quantitative comparison on reconstruction. Both Trellis and HunYuan2.1 require perfect 2D bounding boxes, segmentation masks, and poses as inputs, whereas our method operates in an end-to-end manner directly from stereo images. Here, CD denotes the Chamfer Distance, SPE refers to the Shape Proportion Error, and inference time is measured in seconds per object and per scene.
> Method Easy Medium Hard
> AP ↑APE ↓ACD ↓AP ↑APE ↓ACD ↓AP ↑APE ↓ACD ↓
> Coders [40] 0.102 2.200 2.348 0.112 2.144 3.084 0.070 2.230 10.146 Coders with PASR 0.495 1.332 0.850 0.572 1.522 1.225 0.483 1.711 1.816 Ours 0.702 0.885 0.413 0.764 1.096 0.761 0.752 1.248 1.224 Ours-48 0.759 0.762 0.311 0.824 0.951 0.604 0.748 1.101 1.035
> Table 2. Quantitative comparisons on LVS6D dataset. Here, AP refers to the Average Precision of 3DIoU with a threshold of 50%. APE denotes the Average Position Error, and ACD represents the Average Chamfer distance. The results demonstrate that UniPR outperforms Coders across all dataset subsets, with particularly strong improvements observed in the Hard subset with high intra-class variations.

complexity. We compute all evaluation metrics separately for each subset to provide a comprehensive assessment of the proposed method. In addition, we capture several real-world scenes using the same stereo camera configuration to evaluate generalization performance, and we conduct real-robot experiments to validate grasping based on the pre-dicted object position and geometry using a simple grasp policy. Further details are provided in the Appendix. 

Implementation Details For the pose-aware shape VAE, we input 2,048 surface points with a feature dimension C

of 256 and a KL divergence channel size Ckl of 64. Using objects from the LVS6D dataset, we apply random rotations to all objects, resulting in approximately 76M training pairs. UniPR is trained using the AdamW optimizer [22] with a weight decay of 10 −2. The initial learning rate is set to 

2.0 × 10 −4 and follows a cosine annealing schedule [21] for learning rate decay. All experiments are conducted over 24 epochs on 8 RTX 3090 GPUs with a batch size of 8. For testing, we use a single RTX 3090 GPU. 

4.2. 3D Reconstruction Results 

Data To evaluate the shape reconstruction performance of our method against SOTA image-to-3D generative models, we select 50 diverse objects from the LVS6D dataset. For a fair comparison, ground-truth 2D bounding boxes and seg-mentation masks are provided to all baseline methods. 

Metrics We evaluate the quality of reconstructed object meshes using the Chamfer Distance (CD) and F-Score, which measure geometric similarity between the recon-structed and GT meshes. For all baseline methods, GT poses are provided to ensure accurate shape alignment dur-ing evaluation. In addition, we introduce the Shape Pro-portion Error (SPE) to assess the physical accuracy of re-constructed objects. SPE quantifies the relative error in an object’s width, height, and depth, reflecting how well each method preserves true object proportions. 

Results The quantitative results are presented in Table 1. Our method consistently outperforms all baselines across CD, F-Score, and SPE metrics, reflecting the superior ge-ometric fidelity and shape consistency achieved by our ap-proach. Trellis [34] and Hunyuan2.1 [11] fails in most cases due to severe occlusions and inaccurate shape proportion estimation. To provide a fair assessment of its success-ful cases, we additionally report CD@Top10, which mea-sures the reconstruction quality of its top 10 valid outputs. Furthermore, we evaluate the efficiency of our end-to-end design, particularly in processing entire scenes containing multiple objects (5 objects in Table 1). The results demon-strate UniPR achieves up to a 100× speed-up in full-scene reconstruction compared to sequential baselines, underscor-ing its remarkable efficiency in multi-object processing. We present qualitative comparisons in Figure 4, which highlight the accurate preservation of shape proportions achieved by UniPR and its strong capability for reconstructing previ-ously unseen objects. Notably, our method performs ro-bustly under occlusion, primarily because it leverages stereo vision and integrates information from the entire image, while others rely only on segmented image regions. 

4.3. Comparison on LVS6D dataset 

Metrics We evaluate the performance of the proposed net-work using three metrics that jointly assess its detection, lo-calization, and reconstruction capabilities. First, we adopt the Average Precision (AP) based on 3D Intersection over Union (3D IoU) to measure the overall 3D detection per-formance. For localization accuracy, we use the Average Position Error (APE), computed as the MSE between the predicted and ground-truth 3D centers. Finally, to evalu-ate the quality of pose-aware shape reconstruction, we em-ploy the Average Chamfer Distance (ACD), a widely used metric that measures geometric dissimilarity between re-constructed and ground-truth point sets. 

Baselines Coders [40] is currently the only stereo-based method designed for category-level 6D object pose estima-6Figure 4. Qualitative shape reconstruction results compared with image-to-3D models. The results demonstrate the accurate preserva-tion of shape proportions achieved by our proposed UniPR across various objects in the LVS6D dataset.   

> Figure 5. Qualitative pose-aware shape reconstruction results on LVS6D dataset. The results highlight the key role of PASR in simplifying rotation prediction, as it eliminates the ambiguity caused by different canonical definitions for categories with similar geometry.

tion and shape reconstruction. For a fair comparison, we re-train Coders on the LVS6D dataset using a canonical shape VAE constructed within a predefined canonical space de-rived from OmniObject3D. In addition, we integrate our proposed PASR into Coders as an ablation study to eval-uate the effectiveness of our pose-aware design compared to predefined canonical space representations. 

Results Table 2 presents a comprehensive comparison be-tween our method and existing approaches. UniPR consis-tently outperforms all competitors across every evaluation metric and dataset subset, with particularly strong gains ob-served in the Hard subset. As object category complexity increases, Coders suffers from greater confusion and de-graded performance due to the ambiguities and intra-class variations introduced by predefined canonical spaces. In contrast, the integration of our PASR into Coders further validates the advantages of our design as it effectively mit-igates the ambiguities inherent in human-defined canonical spaces and facilitates scalable training on large-vocabulary datasets. Qualitative comparisons shown in Figure 5 fur-ther support these findings. Notably, the rotation predictions of UniPR exhibit significant improvement over Coders, pri-marily because our pose-aware design eliminates rotational ambiguities for categories with similar geometric structures. 

4.4. Comparison on Public Stereo datasets 

Data To further investigate the our design for stereo vision, we further introduce the public TOD [20] and SS3D [40] datasets for evaluation. We follow the same settings with Coders [40] and train UniPR separately on each of the two datasets and evaluate our method on novel instances from each category that are not included in the training process. 

Metrics Following [40], we adopt the 3D IoU, which jointly 7evaluates the accuracy of rotation, translation and scale. In addition, we assess rotation and translation precision sep-arately using threshold-based accuracy metrics. Specifi-cally, a prediction is regarded as correct only if rotation er-ror falls within {5◦, 10 ◦} and translation error lies within 

{2cm, 5cm, 10 cm }. This combined evaluation provides a comprehensive measure of spatial accuracy. 

Pose estimation For a fair comparison with previous stereo-based pose estimation methods, we introduce an additional pose decoding layer following the pose embeddings. Given a canonical shape definition during training, UniPR predicts the relative object pose using several MLP layers. 

Results Our proposed method outperforms most others across various metrics, demonstrating the significant supe-riority of our proposed modules, as shown in Tab. 3. The TOD dataset emphasizes transparent objects, highlighting the importance of stereo vision due to the absence of depth sensor data. Our method also surpasses competitors on the SS3D dataset, showcasing the efficiency of our pose-aware shape representation. Additional detailed and quantitative results are provided in the supplementary material. 

4.5. Ablation Study 

We present ablation experiments on the LVS6D dataset. 

Insight of Pose-aware Shape Representation In this ex-periment, we aim to explicitly validate the effectiveness of the proposed PASR. To this end, we perform a comparative analysis by replacing PASR with a conventional canonical shape reconstruction while keeping the rest of the UniPR architecture unchanged. The results, presented in Table 4, clearly demonstrate that PASR is critical for achieving high reconstruction accuracy. When PASR is removed, the ACD on challenging subsets increases by nearly 10x , indicating that previous canonical representations fail to establish ro-bust category priors for geometrically diverse objects. 

Stereo or Monocular We conduct experiments to exam-ine the advantages of using stereo cameras over monocular ones. For this comparison, we train and evaluate a vari-ant of our model using only the left-view images from the stereo setup. As shown in the first columns of Table 4, the stereo configuration significantly outperforms the monocu-lar counterpart. This improvement primarily stems from the inherent limitation of monocular inputs in recovering accu-rate depth information, particularly for objects with diverse scales or complex spatial arrangements. 

Impact of Spherical Voxel Space As discussed in Sec-tion 3.1, we utilize a spherical voxel space instead of a cubic voxel space to maintain rotational consistency. This design is essential because normalizing objects with varying rota-tions can introduce unwanted scale dependencies linked to their orientation, leading to confusion during training. To evaluate the effectiveness of this approach, we conducted an experiment comparing spherical and cubic voxel spaces on the hard subset of LVS6D, where complex objects fre-                                                         

> Dataset Method 3D25 3D50 3D75
> 10 ◦
> 10cm 10 ◦
> 5cm 5◦
> 2cm
> SPD [30] 54.1 13.6 -11 6.9 -SGPASPD [2] 55.8 14.6 -13.8 8.1 -KeyPose [20] ---43.7 38.7 -StereoPose [3] 91.7 49.8 -54.2 46.1 -Coders [40] 100 99.8 62.1 90.8 90.8 64.8
> TOD [20] Ours 100 97.5 52.5 86.9 86.9 63.2
> Dataset Method 3D25 3D50 3D75
> 10 ◦
> 10cm 5◦
> 5cm 5◦
> 2cm
> Coders [40] -61.7 21.5 -54.7 28.1 SS3D [40] Ours 91.5 89.3 55.4 88.4 78.4 41.3

Table 3. Comparison on public stereo datasets. The results highlight the effectiveness of the proposed PASR and its capability to decode accurate 6D object poses.                                 

> Method Easy Medium Hard
> AP ↑ACD ↓AP ↑ACD ↓AP ↑ACD ↓
> w.o. Pose-aware S. R. 0.370 1.258 0.330 2.711 0.196 12.363 Ours 0.702 0.413 0.764 0.761 0.752 1.224
> Monocular 0.173 1.676 0.266 1.633 0.270 2.444 Stereo 0.702 0.413 0.764 0.761 0.752 1.224

Table 4. Ablation study results. The results underscore the criti-cal role of PASR in enabling large-vocabulary object detection and pose-aware shape reconstruction, as well as the importance of the stereo design for achieving accurate geometric recovery.          

> Method Hard
> AP ↑APE ↓ACD ↓
> w.o. Spherical Voxel Space 0.677 1.129 1.310 Ours 0.752 1.248 1.224

Table 5. Ablation on spherical voxel space. We conduct this experiment with shape decoder utilizing spherical and cubic voxel space. This experiment is conducted only on the hard subset of LVS6D, as most re-normalized objects are included in this subset. 

quently encounter these issues. Table 5 demonstrates that our proposed spherical voxel space significantly enhances training stability and performance. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose the first unified object-level real-to-sim transfer network, UniPR, designed for improved per-ception and reconstruction from a single stereo image pair. We construct a large-vocabulary stereo dataset, LVS6D, comprising 192 categories and over 6,300 everyday ob-jects, leveraging the efficiency of our Pose-Aware Shape Representation (PASR). Furthermore, we establish a uni-fied paradigm that eliminates the need for separate de-tection, segmentation, and reconstruction submodules, en-abling whole-scene object processing in a single feedfor-ward pass. Experiments demonstrate that UniPR achieves accurate shape proportions and accelerated inference speed, benefiting from the integrated PASR design. The principal limitation of UniPR is its reduced performance in monoc-ular settings due to insufficient depth information. We aim to address this limitation by incorporating large-scale depth modules, which would allow our proposed representation to function effectively with simpler camera setups. 8Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Singapore National Robotics Programme Research Project under Grant DS-RFM M25N4N2009. 

## References 

[1] Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European confer-ence on computer vision , pages 213–229. Springer, 2020. 5 [2] Kai Chen and Qi Dou. Sgpa: Structure-guided prior adapta-tion for category-level 6d object pose estimation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 2773–2782, 2021. 8 [3] Kai Chen, Stephen James, Congying Sui, Yun-Hui Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Qi Dou. Stereopose: Category-level 6d transparent object pose estimation from stereo images via back-view nocs. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2855–2861. IEEE, 2023. 2, 8 [4] Maximilian Denninger, Dominik Winkelbauer, Martin Sundermeyer, Wout Boerdijk, Markus Wendelin Knauer, Klaus H Strobl, Matthias Humt, and Rudolph Triebel. Blenderproc2: A procedural pipeline for photorealistic ren-dering. Journal of Open Source Software , 8(82):4901, 2023. 1[5] Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kin-man, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann, Thomas B McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google scanned objects: A high-quality dataset of 3d scanned household items. In 2022 In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 2553–2560. IEEE, 2022. 5, 1 [6] Yang Fu and Xiaolong Wang. Category-level 6d object pose estimation in the wild: A semi-supervised learning approach and a new dataset. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2022. 3 [7] Zheng Geng, Nan Wang, Shaocong Xu, Chongjie Ye, Bo-han Li, Zhaoxi Chen, Sida Peng, and Hao Zhao. One view, many worlds: Single-image to 3d object meets genera-tive domain randomization for one-shot 6d pose estimation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07978 , 2025. 2, 3 [8] Xingyi He, Jiaming Sun, Yuang Wang, Di Huang, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Onepose++: Keypoint-free one-shot object pose estimation without cad models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:35103–35115, 2022. 2, 3 [9] Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Yunzhu Li, Ruohan Zhang, and Li Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-temporal reasoning of rela-tional keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652 , 2024. 1, 3 [10] Yuanhui Huang, Wenzhao Zheng, Yunpeng Zhang, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Tri-perspective view for vision-based 3d semantic occupancy prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9223–9232, 2023. 4 [11] Team Hunyuan3D, Shuhui Yang, Mingxin Yang, Yifei Feng, Xin Huang, Sheng Zhang, Zebin He, Di Luo, Haolin Liu, Yunfei Zhao, et al. Hunyuan3d 2.1: From images to high-fidelity 3d assets with production-ready pbr material. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15442 , 2025. 2, 3, 6 [12] Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Thomas Kollar, Michael Laskey, Kevin Stone, and Zsolt Kira. Centersnap: Single-shot multi-object 3d shape reconstruction and categorical 6d pose and size estimation. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 10632–10640. IEEE, 2022. 3 [13] Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Sergey Zakharov, Rares Ambrus, Thomas Kollar, Zsolt Kira, and Adrien Gaidon. Shapo: Im-plicit representations for multi-object shape, appearance, and pose optimization. In European Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 275–292. Springer, 2022. 3 [14] Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Chen, Huangyue Yu, Yan Wang, Xuesong Niu, Tengyu Liu, Qing Li, and Siyuan Huang. Sceneverse: Scaling 3d vision-language learning for grounded scene understanding. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 289–310. Springer, 2025. 1 [15] Zhenyu Jiang, Cheng-Chun Hsu, and Yuke Zhu. Ditto: Building digital twins of articulated objects from interaction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5616–5626, 2022. 1, 3[16] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-tional bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. 4 [17] Harold W Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly , 2(1-2):83–97, 1955. 5 [18] Taeyeop Lee, Bowen Wen, Minjun Kang, Gyuree Kang, In So Kweon, and Kuk-Jin Yoon. Any6d: Model-free 6d pose estimation of novel objects. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 11633–11643, 2025. 2, 3 [19] Zhuoling Li, Chuanrui Zhang, Wei-Chiu Ma, Yipin Zhou, Linyan Huang, Haoqian Wang, SerNam Lim, and Heng-shuang Zhao. Voxelformer: Bird’s-eye-view feature gener-ation based on dual-view attention for multi-view 3d object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01054 , 2023. 1 [20] Xingyu Liu, Rico Jonschkowski, Anelia Angelova, and Kurt Konolige. Keypose: Multi-view 3d labeling and key-point estimation for transparent objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11602–11610, 2020. 2, 7, 8 [21] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochas-tic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983 , 2016. 6 [22] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. 6 [23] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4460–4470, 2019. 5 [24] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: 

9Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-thesis. Communications of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. 2, 3[25] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. 3 [26] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-national conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 3 [27] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 5 [28] Jiaming Sun, Zihao Wang, Siyu Zhang, Xingyi He, Hongcheng Zhao, Guofeng Zhang, and Xiaowei Zhou. Onepose: One-shot object pose estimation without cad mod-els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6825–6834, 2022. 2 [29] Bugra Tekin, Sudipta N Sinha, and Pascal Fua. Real-time seamless single shot 6d object pose prediction. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 292–301, 2018. 2, 3 [30] Meng Tian, Marcelo H Ang, and Gim Hee Lee. Shape prior deformation for categorical 6d object pose and size estima-tion. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Con-ference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXI 16 , pages 530–546. Springer, 2020. 3, 8 [31] He Wang, Srinath Sridhar, Jingwei Huang, Julien Valentin, Shuran Song, and Leonidas J Guibas. Normalized object coordinate space for category-level 6d object pose and size estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2642– 2651, 2019. 2, 3 [32] Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17868– 17879, 2024. 3 [33] Tong Wu, Jiarui Zhang, Xiao Fu, Yuxin Wang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Wayne Wu, Lei Yang, Jiaqi Wang, Chen Qian, et al. Omniobject3d: Large-vocabulary 3d object dataset for realistic perception, reconstruction and generation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 803–814, 2023. 5, 1 [34] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 21469–21480, 2025. 2, 3, 6 [35] Yu Xiang, Tanner Schmidt, Venkatraman Narayanan, and Dieter Fox. Posecnn: A convolutional neural network for 6d object pose estimation in cluttered scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00199 , 2017. 2 [36] Yuxiao Yang, Peihao Li, Yuhong Zhang, Junzhe Lu, Xian-glong He, Minghan Qin, Weitao Wang, and Haoqian Wang. Nova3d: Normal aligned video diffusion model for single image to 3d generation. In 2025 IEEE International Con-ference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2025. 3 [37] Yuxiao Yang, Xiaoxiao Long, Zhiyang Dou, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Qingsong Yan, Yuexin Ma, Haoqian Wang, Zhiqiang Wu, and Wei Yin. Wonder3d++: Cross-domain diffusion for high-fidelity 3d generation from a single im-age. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. 3 [38] Lin Yen-Chen, Pete Florence, Jonathan T Barron, Alberto Rodriguez, Phillip Isola, and Tsung-Yi Lin. inerf: Inverting neural radiance fields for pose estimation. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 1323–1330. IEEE, 2021. 3 [39] Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Niessner, and Peter Wonka. 3dshape2vecset: A 3d shape representation for neu-ral fields and generative diffusion models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(4):1–16, 2023. 4, 5, 1 [40] Chuanrui Zhang, Yonggen Ling, Minglei Lu, Minghan Qin, and Haoqian Wang. Category-level object detection, pose estimation and reconstruction from stereo images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06984 , 2024. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1 [41] Chuanrui Zhang, Zhengxian Wu, Guanxing Lu, Yansong Tang, and Ziwei Wang. imowm: Taming interactive multi-modal world model for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09036 , 2025. 1 [42] Chuanrui Zhang, Yingshuang Zou, Zhuoling Li, Minmin Yi, and Haoqian Wang. Transplat: Generalizable 3d gaussian splatting from sparse multi-view images with transformers. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , pages 9869–9877, 2025. 1 [43] Mengchen Zhang, Tong Wu, Tai Wang, Tengfei Wang, Zi-wei Liu, and Dahua Lin. Omni6d: Large-vocabulary 3d ob-ject dataset for category-level 6d object pose estimation. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 216–232. Springer, 2025. 3 [44] Yingshuang Zou, Yikang Ding, Xi Qiu, Haoqian Wang, and Haotian Zhang. M2depth: Self-supervised two-frame m ulti-camera m etric depth estimation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 269–285. Springer, 2024. 1 [45] Yingshuang Zou, Yikang Ding, Chuanrui Zhang, Jiazhe Guo, Bohan Li, Xiaoyang Lyu, Feiyang Tan, Xiaojuan Qi, and Haoqian Wang. Mudg: Taming multi-modal diffusion with gaussian splatting for urban scene reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10604 , 2025. 1 

10 UniPR: Unified Object-level Real-to-Sim Perception and Reconstruction from a Single Stereo Pair 

# Supplementary Material 

## 6. Overview 

We provide videos that offer a brief introduction to UniPR, along with additional visualizations on real-world data and real-robot experiments. All video files are included in the Supplementary Material. The formulation and implementation details of the Pose-Aware Shape VAE are provided in Sec. 7. Similarly, fur-ther details of the LVS6D dataset are described in Sec. 8. More ablation studies are provided in Sec. 9. With the emergence of SAM 3D Objects, we also clarify the con-ceptual and technical differences between their approach and UniPR, and present several comparative examples in Sec. 10. Real-world experimental results of UniPR are pre-sented in Sec. 11. For a more comprehensive understanding of reconstruction quality, we include visual comparisons be-tween Coders [40] and UniPR in Sec. 12. Moreover, qual-itative results on the proposed LVS6D dataset are summa-rized in Sec. 13. Finally, detailed evaluation metrics and visualizations on public datasets are provided in Sec. 14. 

## 7. Details for PASR Design 

Details for Pose-Aware Shape VAE Our VAE model is based on 3DShape2VecSet [39] and takes object surface point clouds in an object-centered coordinate system as in-put. We adopt a spherical voxel space by sampling query points from a unit sphere rather than a cube, which is more suitable for representing objects under diverse rota-tions. The objective of our VAE model is to encode ob-jects into lightweight embeddings for use in the detection pipeline. All ground-truth shape distributions for detection pipeline are generated using the encoder of our pretrained VAE model. For the encoder εVAE we first utilize self-attention layers to extract information from zsurface ∈ RN ×C to point latent embedding zpoint ∈ RN ×C .

zpoint = SelfAttn( zsurface ) (10) We initialize the object latent embedding, zobject ∈ RC ,and employ cross-attention layers to learn a mapping from the point distribution to the object embedding, as described in the main text. To ensure an effective representation and reduce the latent channel, we apply KL regularization dur-ing this process. For the decoder DVAE , we first generate the sampled ob-ject latent embedding zsampled ∈ RC , as outlined in the main text. Next, we initialize the point latent embedding, 

ˆzpoint ∈ RN ×C , using a standard Gaussian distribution. Cross-attention layers are then utilized to recover informa-tion from the sampled object latent embedding zsampled 

into the point latent embedding: 

ˆzpoint = CrossAttn( ˆzpoint , zsampled ) (11) Further architectural details of the proposed pose-aware shape VAE are provided in the main text. 

Generative performance of PASR. We evaluate the gen-erative performance of PASR across various shapes within the same category, diverse object orientations, and its inter-polation capabilities in both pose and shape, as illustrated in Fig. 6. The results demonstrate the robustness of the learned PASR embedding space. 

Texture Retrieval. Our method focuses primarily on shape reconstruction and does not include a dedicated texture gen-eration module. However, given the VecSet representa-tion produced by UniPR, we can seamlessly integrate ex-ternal texture generation models. In particular, we employ Hunyuan3D-Paint-v2.1 to synthesize high-quality textures based on our reconstructed shapes, as demonstrated in the teaser, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. 

## 8. Details for LVS6D 

Dataset structure. Our dataset is organized using a folder-based structure. For each stereo image, we provide ob-ject masks along with comprehensive annotations, includ-ing object category, position, scale, rotation, and the cor-responding 3D shape. The object shape data include tex-tured meshes sourced from OmniObject3D [33] and Google Scanned Objects (GSO) [5]. OmniObject3D contains 6,000 scanned objects across 190 daily-use categories, while GSO provides over 1,000 high-quality 3D-scanned household items. The proposed LVS6D dataset spans 192 categories and includes more than 6,300 scanned objects. We gener-ate approximately 0.4M stereo images for training and 1,000 images for testing, using over 500 high–dynamic-range (HDRI) backgrounds. Rendering is performed with BlenderProc 2.6.1 [4]. The stereo camera configuration uses a 13,cm baseline, and all images are captured at a res-olution of 1920 ×1200 pixels. In addition to synthetic data, we also capture several real-scene images using the identical stereo setup to eval-uate real-world generalization. Overall, LVS6D is, to our knowledge, the largest stereo category-level object dataset designed for 6D pose estimation and shape reconstruction to date. 1(a) various shapes within the 

same category Candy 

> Shape

Recon 

(b) diverse object 

orientations 

GT Recon 

(c) interpolation capabilities for 

shape and pose 

Interpolation Obj. A Obj. B 

> Pose

GT Figure 6. Generative performance of PASR. We evaluate PASR’s generative performance on same-category shapes (a), diverse object orientations (b), and pose-shape interpolation capabilities (c). Results demonstrate the robustness of the learned embedding space. bun 

> ginger
> timer
> pear
> pastry
> cake
> bowl
> pizza
> helmet
> facial cream
> lotus root
> Toy  bus
> pineapple
> dinosaur
> teddy bear
> laptop
> number

# easy medium hard   

> Figure 7. Category Distribution of the LVS6D dataset. We divide the dataset into three subsets Easy, Medium, and Hard based on the reconstruction difficulty. As the difficulty increases, the objects in each subset exhibit more complex geometries.

LVS6D subsets. As discussed in the main text, we divide the categories in LVS6D into Easy, Medium, and Hard sub-sets according to object complexity. Tab. 6 lists ten rep-resentative categories for each subset. Objects in the Easy subset exhibit simple and regular geometries (e.g., spheres, cubes) and display relatively low intra-class variation. In contrast, the Medium and Hard subsets contain objects with increasingly complex shapes and significantly higher intra-class variability, as shown in Fig. 7. For all evaluation met-rics, we compute the results for every category individually and report the mean values for each subset. 

## 9. Additional Experimental Results 

9.1. Ablation Study on Loss Function 

The loss term Lshape comprises both the KL divergence loss 

Lkl and the reconstruction loss Lrecon , as defined in Eq.7. We also conducted an ablation study without KL-based su-pervision, as shown in Tab. 7. The results demonstrate the importance of KL-based supervision for utilizing the pre-trained VAE model. 

9.2. Fairness Comparison on Input Modalities 

When comparing stereo methods with monocular baselines like Trellis, a potential concern is the inherent scale ambi-guity present in monocular inputs. To verify that UniPR’s performance gains stem primarily from architectural inno-vation rather than merely the sensor modality, we conducted extended experiments across four configurations: monocu-lar Trellis, Trellis-stereo (extending Trellis with stereo input using ground-truth crops), Ours-mono (our pipeline adapted for monocular input), and our full stereo UniPR. As shown in Tab. 8, UniPR-mono significantly outper-forms both Trellis variants in geometric consistency (CD and F-Score). Furthermore, our full stereo model exceeds Trellis-stereo by a wide margin in Shape Proportion Error (SPE). This confirms that our proposed Pose-Aware Shape Representation and the end-to-end Triplane integration are the primary drivers of the observed improvements, demon-strating that UniPR efficiently fuses geometric constraints to achieve superior metric-scale reconstruction. 

9.3. Part-Aware Refinement on TOD 

In evaluating our method on the TOD dataset, we ob-served a performance discrepancy in categories with com-2Subsets Object Samples 

Easy peach, ball, cake, bread, bun, egg, medicine bottle, mango, pomegranate, walnut 

Medium biscuit, candy, cheese, chili, doll, lotus root, small box, shoe, soap, teapot 

Hard pineapple, dinosaur, razor, teddy bear, keyboard, laptop, bamboo shoots, banana, clock, glasses case 

Table 6. Representative categories of LVS6D across subsets. Ten representative categories are listed per subset: Easy subset objects have simple regular geometries, while Medium/Hard subsets include increasingly complex shapes and higher intra-class variability. 

Method AP ↑ APE ↓ ACD ↓

w.o. KL-based supervision 0.675 1.210 2.947 Ours 0.752 1.248 1.224 

Table 7. The ablation of KL-based supervision. The results demonstrate the importance of KL-based supervision for utilizing the pretrained VAE model.                        

> Method Input Modality CD ↓F-Score ↑SPE ↓
> Trellis Monocular 0.1096 0.334 0.475 Trellis-stereo Stereo (GT Crops) 0.1001 0.388 0.376 Ours-mono Monocular 0.0141 0.868 0.110 Ours (Full) Stereo 0.0083 0.883 0.109

Table 8. Fairness comparison on input modalities and recon-struction metrics. Our method demonstrates superior geometric consistency and shape proportion accuracy compared to Trellis, regardless of the input modality. 

plex topologies, such as the ”mug” category. The primary cause of this gap is that baseline methods like Coders [40] employ a part-aware prediction strategy to determine rota-tion based on specific features (e.g., handle positioning). In contrast, our original pipeline relied on global orienta-tion without explicit part-level priors. Furthermore, another primary driver of the observed performance gap is that the baseline models are pre-trained on the comprehensive SS3D dataset, whereas our model is trained from scratch. To ensure a rigorous and fair comparison, we imple-mented a part-aware refinement stage specifically for mug-like objects. As shown in Tab. 9, this enhancement enables UniPR to effectively resolve topological complexities and outperform Coders across most overall evaluation metrics.                              

> Method Refinement Mug Overall
> 5◦2cm ↑10 ◦5cm ↑5◦2cm ↑10 ◦5cm ↑
> Coders Part-Aware 56.2 81.9 64.8 90.8 Ours (Original) Global-only 36.8 74.6 63.2 86.9 Ours ( Enhanced )Part-Aware 46.6 95.0 69.1 97.5

Table 9. Evaluation on the TOD dataset with part refinement. 

By incorporating part-aware refinement, our enhanced model suc-cessfully resolves topological complexities and maintains its supe-riority in real-to-sim perception tasks. 

## 10. Comparison with SAM 3D Objects 

SAM 3D Objects is a recent image-to-3D object generation pipeline developed concurrently with UniPR. Here, we clar-ify the key differences. First, although SAM 3D unifies segmentation and recon-struction, it still relies on an external detection module for object perception. In contrast, UniPR provides a fully end-to-end perception–reconstruction pipeline without requiring separate detection or segmentation stages. Second, UniPR leverages stereo vision, whereas SAM 3D operates on monocular images. Stereo geometry pro-vides metric depth cues, enabling accurate real-to-sim trans-fer and supporting real-world robotic grasping experiments, as demonstrated in Sec. 11. This depth-aware design also leads to more reliable shape proportions in many cases and allows UniPR to handle objects with ambiguous or hard-to-recognize categories (e.g., stones and unstructured shapes) as shown in Fig. 8, Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. Third, SAM 3D processes objects individually, requiring one-by-one reconstruction. UniPR, by contrast, performs parallel full-scene processing in a single forward pass, of-fering significantly higher efficiency and better utilization of global context. In summary, UniPR differs fundamentally from SAM 3D Objects. Rather than serving as a general-purpose image-to-3D generator, UniPR targets tabletop object perception, metric reconstruction, and downstream robotic manipula-tion, making it a specialized and practically oriented model within the real-to-sim domain. 

## 11. Results on Real-world Data 

We further present qualitative comparisons on real-world scenes in Fig. 12, where we compare UniPR with Coders. The results demonstrate that UniPR exhibits strong gener-alization capability when applied to real-world inputs. To further validate the metric accuracy of UniPR’s pre-dicted object positions and scales, we conduct real-robot ex-periments using a simple top-to-bottom grasping policy. By directly using UniPR’s metric-scale pose and shape predic-tions as input to the grasping policy, the robot successfully grasps a variety of objects, confirming the practical relia-bility of our method. Grasping results are provided in the accompanying video. 3Figure 8. Comparision with SAM 3D Object on real scene. 

> Figure 9. Comparision with SAM 3D Object on simulated scene.
> Figure 10. Illustration of SAM 3D Object test result.

## 12. Visualization of Reconstruction Results 

We present the visualization of reconstruction results on the LVS6D dataset in Fig. 13. As demonstrated, our UniPR method consistently produces high-quality meshes, show-casing the effectiveness of pose-aware shape reconstruction. Our UniPR does not need category-level prior so we can generate a more detailed object mesh. 

## 13. Qualitative Results on LVS6D 

We present qualitative results on LVS6D in Fig. 11. No-tably, the rotation predictions produced by UniPR demon-strate significant improvements compared to UniPR. In ad-dition, UniPR achieves superior performance in mesh re-construction. 

## 14. Detailed evaluation on public datasets 

We present a detailed evaluation of the 16 categories in the SS3D dataset which validates the effectiveness of our method. Additionally, we visualize the detection results in Fig. 14. Furthermore, Tab. 10 provides a detailed analysis of our method’s performance on TOD. 4Category Banana Bool Bottle Bowl Carrot Cork Cucumber Cup 

Coders-3D50 72 90 71 59 42 89 34 62 

Ours -3D50 96 +24 97 +7 80 +9 98 +39 88 +46 97 +8 95 +61 98 +36 

Coders-3D75 26 51 16 20 11 45 9 16 

Ours -3D75 60 +34 83 +32 54 +38 63 +37 59 +48 69 +24 57 +48 59 +43 

Coders-5◦5cm 47 65 80 58 51 74 38 72 

Ours -5◦5cm 75 +28 87 +22 75 -5 96 +38 88 +37 90 +16 84 +46 96 +24 

Coders-5◦2cm 26 43 33 23 22 48 20 33 

Ours -5◦2cm 34 +8 48 +5 39 +6 63 +40 53 +31 49 +1 40 +20 61 +28 

Category Dish Fork Knife LargeBox Orange SmallBox Scissors Spoon 

Coders-3D50 88 54 71 52 35 66 48 42 

Ours -3D50 95 +7 80 +26 68 -3 90 +38 95 +60 94 +28 94 +46 55 +13 

Coders-3D75 37 15 12 9 6 32 18 10 

Ours -3D75 56 +19 36 +21 45 +33 69 +60 41 +35 55 +23 50 +32 29 +19 

Coders-5◦5cm 64 58 61 16 56 32 51 33 

Ours -5◦5cm 79 +15 70 +12 62 +1 69 +53 95 +39 57 +25 77 +26 44 +11 

Coders-5◦2cm 20 33 33 5 25 24 29 20 Ours -5◦2cm 37 +17 41 +8 31 -2 26 +21 52 +27 26 +2 33 +4 19 -1 

Table 10. Detailed Results on the SS3D Test Dataset. We evaluate UniPR on the SS3D test dataset with 16 categories of unseen objects. The first row corresponds to categories in reference to SS3D. Our method can manage objects across all 16 categories, encompassing various sizes, shapes and materials, demonstrating the generalization capability of our stereo framework. The gray rows in the table indicate results from our method and the numbers in the table represent accuracy percentages. 

5Input GT Coders [40] UniPR 

Figure 11. Qualitative results on LVS6D dataset. We present visualizations of Coders [40] and UniPR on the LVS6D dataset. The results highlight our superior performance on the LVS6D dataset. 

6Input-Left Input-Right Coders [40] UniPR 

Figure 12. Qualitative results on real-world data. We present visualizations of Coders and UniPR on real-world data. We compare the UniPR with Coders [40]. The results demonstrate UniPR’s strong generalization ability with real-world data. 

Figure 13. Qualitative Results of Reconstruction. Our approach generates meshes with high quality which is attributed to the effective-ness of pose-aware shape representation. 

7GT 

UniPR 

GT 

UniPR 

GT 

UniPR 

Figure 14. Visualization of StereoPose on SS3D dataset. Our proposed UniPR demonstrates consistently strong performance across various scenarios. 

8