Title: MeshTailor: Cutting Seams via Generative Mesh Traversal

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27309v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:52:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# MeshTailor: Cutting Seams via Generative Mesh Traversal 

# Xueqi Ma 1 Xingguang Yan 2 Congyue Zhang 1 Hui Huang 1* 1Shenzhen University 2Simon Fraser University 

Figure 1. MeshTailor. Top: MeshTailor generates seams (colored lines) directly on 3D meshes, producing clean, semantically aligned cuts that respect natural shape structure. Bottom: The resulting seams partition surfaces into coherent UV charts, which are flattened into 2D layouts with minimal fragmentation. Right: These high-quality UV maps facilitate seamless texture application, as demonstrated by the final textured character model. 

# Abstract 

We present MeshTailor, the first mesh-native generative framework for synthesizing edge-aligned seams on 3D surfaces. Unlike prior optimization-based or extrinsic learning-based methods, MeshTailor operates directly on the mesh graph, eliminating projection artifacts and frag-ile snapping heuristics. We introduce ChainingSeams, a hi-erarchical serialization of the seam graph that prioritizes global structural cuts before local details in a coarse-to-fine manner, and a dual-stream encoder that fuses topolog-ical and geometric context. Leveraging this hierarchical representation and enriched vertex embeddings, our Mesh-Tailor Transformer utilizes an autoregressive pointer layer to trace seams vertex-by-vertex within local neighborhoods, ensuring projection-free, edge-aligned seams. Extensive evaluations show that MeshTailor produces more coher-ent, professional-quality seam layouts compared to recent optimization-based and learning-based baselines. 

> ∗Corresponding author.

# 1. Introduction 

The surfaces of 3D shapes, despite their continuity, implic-itly encode natural partitions ideal for flattening into 2D do-mains. Much like a skilled tailor who reads the contours of a body to place seams where they are least intrusive, a shape’s intrinsic geometry suggests boundaries through curvature extrema and symmetries. Professionals ”listen” to these ge-ometric cues, synthesizing them with design intent to trace long, coherent boundaries that respect the object’s shape and functionality. This practice facilitates downstream ap-plications, including texturing, garment design and digital fabrication. However, relying on manual expertise creates a signifi-cant bottleneck in production pipelines, particularly for UV mapping in texture workflows. To automate this, tradi-tional [12, 17, 36] and neural-based [39, 55] methods typ-ically formulate seam generation as an optimization prob-lem, balancing metrics such as distortion and cut length. While mathematically sound, these objectives are inher-ently limited by their focus on local geometric error. They often struggle to capture the high-level structural logic, namely the correspondence between shape morphology and 

> arXiv:2603.27309v1 [cs.GR] 28 Mar 2026

cut placement that guides professionals. Consequently, boundaries derived solely from optimization frequently tra-verse natural symmetries or feature lines, resulting in frag-mented charts that, while low in distortion, lack the seman-tic organization required for intuitive artistic workflows. An alternative is to distill professional cutting strategies via deep learning. However, representing precise seams on irregular meshes poses a fundamental challenge. Exist-ing methods rely on extrinsic proxies that operate outside the native mesh graph. PartUV [46], for instance, predicts segmentation via volumetric fields. Because this proxy is decoupled from the surface geometry, mapping boundaries back to the mesh inevitably introduces aliasing artifacts and misalignment between the subsequent seam planning. More directly, SeamGPT [19] proposes autoregressive seam gen-eration by predicting vertex coordinates in Euclidean space. However, predicted coordinates must be snapped to mesh edges, which can introduce projection artifacts and edge misalignment (we validate this limitation in Sec. 4.5). Working directly on the mesh would eliminate such pro-jection artifacts, yet no prior work has successfully applied deep learning to mesh-native seam generation. The chal-lenge is threefold: First, meshes are irregular graphs lacking the uniform structure that enables efficient convolutions on images or grids. Second, seams are not independent edge labels but form structured graphs with loops, chains, and hierarchical connectivity that need to be modeled explic-itly. Third, production meshes contain thousands of ver-tices and complex topology, making direct vertex-level gen-eration computationally prohibitive. These challenges have historically pushed methods toward extrinsic proxies, de-spite their inherent limitations. Drawing inspiration from the way tailors design seams to fit 3D forms, we introduce MeshTailor , a mesh-native generative framework. Unlike extrinsic methods that suffer from projection artifacts, MeshTailor operates natively on the mesh topology, reformulating seam placement as an au-toregressive graph traversal via a geometry-aware Pointer Network [44]. By restricting the decision space to the lo-cal 1-ring neighborhood, the model traces vertex sequences step-by-step. This approach ensures generated boundaries are mesh-aligned and continuous, operating directly on mesh edges without requiring projection heuristics. To enable this, we introduce ChainingSeams , a serial-ization scheme that imposes a hierarchical order on the ver-tex sequence by prioritizing global structural cuts before local details to mirror a logical top-down design process. We support this representation with a dual-stream encoder 

that fuses topological graph features with geometric shape information represented as point clouds. This hybrid em-bedding equips the pointer network with the rich context needed to trace these hierarchical paths accurately, yield-ing seam layouts that are both edge-aligned and semanti-cally coherent. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our approach yields significantly more professional, less frag-mented seam layouts compared to optimization-based and recent neural baselines. In summary, our key contributions are: • MeshTailor: The first generative framework to synthe-size seams intrinsically on the mesh, ensuring mesh-native, edge-aligned generation without extrinsic proxies or projection. • ChainingSeams: A hierarchical serialization scheme that organizes the seam graph from global partitioning cuts to local details, enabling autoregressive models to prioritize structural logic before fine-grained geometry. • Efficient Graph Traversal: A Pointer Network driven by a dual-stream encoder that fuses topological and ge-ometric context. This mechanism ensures efficiency by restricting vertex selection to local neighborhoods, mir-roring the continuous, shape-aware tracing of a human professional. 

# 2. Related Work 

Seam placement for UV parameterization intersects several research areas, including classical surface flattening, mesh segmentation, and 3D generative modeling. In this section, we review prior methods in these areas, highlighting their limitations for production-ready low-poly assets, and mo-tivate the need for mesh-native seam generation that pre-serves both geometric validity and stylistic consistency. 

2.1. Optimization-based surface parameterization 

Surface parameterization methods [12] optimize geomet-ric objectives to map 3D surfaces to 2D domains. Clas-sic approaches typically assume a fixed chart topology and solve for per-vertex UVs, ranging from foundational barycentric embeddings [6, 8, 9] and Laplacian construc-tions [27, 43] to modern distortion-minimizing formula-tions like LSCM [16], ABF [34, 35], and injectivity-preserving mappings [5, 30, 32]. Joint optimization meth-ods [38] address the coupled problem of cut placement and parameterization: Autocuts [29] and OptCuts [17] optimize seam placement alongside distortion objectives, while vari-ational formulations optimize smooth cut flows [33]. More recently, neural per-instance methods (Nuvo [39], FAM [55]) optimize learnable coordinate fields per shape [1, 26, 55]. While these methods improve robust-ness to bad geometry, they require expensive iterative solves (minutes to hours per mesh) that do not generalize across assets. Furthermore, a critical gap remains regarding style :strictly objective-driven methods often produce seams that are technically valid (low distortion) but practically unus-able (spiral cuts, fragmented islands) for artists who re-quire semantic alignment and long, coherent loops for tex-turing. In contrast, MeshTailor learns generalizable seam Figure 2. Overview of MeshTailor. Left: The dual-stream encoder. The input mesh is processed in parallel: the top stream extracts topological connectivity features H via a Graph Encoder on the mesh topology {V, E }, while the bottom stream samples surface points to extract global shape semantics tokens Z using a pretrained point-cloud encoder (frozen during training). These representations are fused via cross-attention within Transformer Blocks. Right: The autoregressive decoder. At each step, the MeshTailor Transformer conditions on the previously generated sequence (“Seq”) to produce a decoder query. A pointer layer attends to the enhanced vertex embeddings ˜H

> to select the next vertex (green box), which is appended to the sequence. The resulting seam chains partition the mesh into UV charts, visualized here with checkerboard texturing to show low distortion, color-coded charts, and the final 2D UV layout.

priors from data to match professional cutting conventions while preserving mesh-native validity. 

2.2. Mesh segmentation 

Seams are the boundaries of surface decompositions. Mesh segmentation decomposes surfaces into meaningful regions, with traditional methods using geometric cues such as cur-vature, dihedral angles, and spectral analysis. Production toolchains (xatlas [13], Blender [4], Isocharts [58]) apply segmentation strategies to UV unwrapping, forming charts using geometric cues and greedy splitting [2, 14, 31], but of-ten over-segment complex assets, producing excessive frag-mentation. [20, 53] Learning-based segmentation methods inject data-driven priors: PartUV builds on learned part trees for top-down recursive unwrapping [46], while Graph-Seam [42] uses GraphSAGE [10] to learn from professional seam designs and classify whether each edge is a seam, then applies postprocessing to remove artifacts and enhance global structure. DA-Wand learns distortion-aware patch selection for mesh parameterization, treating seams implic-itly as patch boundaries [21]. However, these pipelines treat seams as byproducts of decomposition rather than first-class outputs, relying on heuristics or postprocessing for final edge-level cuts and failing to explicitly model seam struc-ture (loops, chains, ordering) as a controllable mesh-aligned graph. In contrast, MeshTailor directly models seam struc-ture as ordered vertex walks, enabling explicit control over topology and style generation. 

2.3. Generative 3D modeling 

Seam placement can also be considered as a 3D generation problem. Volumetric representations [49] are commonly used for 3D generation via diffusion [48, 54] or autore-gressive models [25, 47, 51], but they lose the underly-ing surface geometry and connectivity. Mesh-based gen-erative models preserve such information by learning di-rectly on mesh data, generating new meshes as polygonal graphs [28], text [45], triangle sequences [11, 37], or UV charts [7, 18, 52]. More closely related are models that generate structural subgraphs of meshes, such as wireframes [23, 24], which represent shapes as ordered vertex–edge graphs capturing salient geometric structure. Seam generation can be viewed as a special case of this, where the target subgraph consists of seam edges. Inspired by MeshGPT, SeamGPT [19] pro-posed an autoregressive formulation to mimic professional cutting workflows, predicting seam vertices as sequences of Euclidean coordinates discretized into spatial bins and ordered by raster scan. Further, SeamCrafter [50] refines seam quality with reinforcement learning. However, all of these methods generate new meshes or graphs, which does not preserve the original mesh topology. In contrast, MeshTailor generates seam subgraphs directly on the given mesh, traversing its vertices and edges without altering topology. Figure 3. Canonical ordering of seam chains (coarse-to-fine). We serialize an unordered seam set into a deterministic sequence for autoregressive training/inference with a loops-first, balance-first, large-patch-first strategy: we prioritize loop cuts over open chains, re-peatedly select the largest remaining surface patch, and within that patch choose the loop cut that best balances the two resulting sub-patch areas (see Supplemental Material B.2 for details). The example shows how primary loop cuts (e.g., around the neck) are placed first to decompose the shape, followed by finer loops on smaller parts (legs, tail, ears), yielding the final ordered chain list and token sequence τ .  

> Figure 4. Step-by-step seam generation as mesh traversal. Our autoregressive decoder traverses the input mesh connectivity, se-lecting the next vertex from the current 1-ring neighborhood. This local constraint makes the predicted seams mesh-native and avoids invalid jumps across the surface.

# 3. Method 

3.1. Overview 

Our goal is to generate UV seams that are both edge-aligned and continuous (mesh-native by construction) and seman-tically coherent . We cast this task as an autoregressive graph traversal on the input mesh M = ( V, E, F). Mesh-Tailor predicts a collection of seam chains C, where each chain is a sequence of connected edges in E represented as a vertex walk c = ( v1, . . . , v T ). However, the global seam layout is inherently an unordered graph, whereas au-toregressive modeling requires a sequentialized represen-tation to operate. To address this, we introduce Chain-ingSeams (Sec. 3.2): a unified formulation that decomposes the seam graph into seam chains and serializes them using a stable, coarse-to-fine ordering. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the framework operates in two stages. First, a dual-stream encoder (Sec. 3.3) fuses local mesh connectivity with global shape semantics to produce context-aware embeddings for every vertex. Second, the 

MeshTailor Transformer (Sec. 3.4) utilizes a pointer layer to autoregressively traverse the graph guided by these em-beddings to generate edge-aligned seam chains. We train the model end-to-end using the ChainingSeams data. 

3.2. ChainingSeams 

To capture the global structure of UV layouts, we move be-yond independent edge labeling and represent seams as a sequence of seam chains . A seam chain c = ( v1, . . . , v T )

is a vertex walk on the mesh where every step corresponds to a mesh edge, i.e., (vt, v t+1 ) ∈ E . This representation naturally supports both open boundaries and closed loops (v1 = vT ), and allows us to enforce edge-alignment by re-stricting the autoregressive decoder to the 1-ring neighbors of the current vertex. See Supplemental Material B.1. 

Canonical Ordering. As transformers require a deter-ministic target sequence, we need to serialize the inherently unordered set of seam chains C. We employ a loops-first, balance-first, large-patch-first ordering strategy. We treat seam placement as a recursive decomposition: we priori-tize loop cuts that divide the largest current surface patch into sub-patches of roughly equal area, followed by seam chains for each connected component. This ordering in-duces a stable, coarse-to-fine curriculum for the model (see Fig. 3). We provide the detailed splitting algorithm and area-balance formulation in Supplemental Material B.2. 

3.3. Dual Stream Encoder 

Effective seam placement requires reasoning over mesh connectivity (to route cuts along edges) and global seman-tics (to align cuts with object parts). To capture these com-plementary signals, we employ a dual-stream architecture. First, to encode local topology, we treat the mesh M

as a graph and process it with a GraphSAGE encoder [10], yielding per-vertex connectivity embeddings {hi}vi∈V with 

hi ∈ Rd. We stack them as H = [ hi]Ni=1 , where H ∈ RN ×d. Second, to capture global shape context invariant to tessellation, we sample a surface point cloud and extract shape tokens Z ∈ RM ×d using a frozen pretrained point cloud encoder [57]. Finally, we fuse these streams via cross-attention layers that inject global shape information into the local vertex representations: 

˜hi = CrossAttn( query = hi, key/value = Z), (1) producing enhanced embeddings ˜hi ∈ Rd that guide the de-coder’s routing decisions, which we stack as ˜H = [ ˜hi]Ni=1 ∈

RN ×d. See Supplemental Material B.3 for details. 

3.4. MeshTailor Transformer 

We generate seam chains autoregressively using a Trans-former decoder equipped with a mesh-native pointer layer .At step t, given the history of previous vertices, the decoder hidden state qt ∈ Rd queries the enhanced vertex embed-dings ˜h to compute a probability distribution over the mesh vertices V:

p(vt+1 = vi | v≤t) = softmax i

 ⟨qt, W˜hi⟩ + mt,i 

, (2) where W ∈ Rd×d is a learned matrix. Crucially, we enforce edge-alignment via the mask term mt,i . We set 

mt,i = 0 if vi ∈ N (vt) (the 1-ring neighbors of the current vertex) or if vi is a valid control token (e.g., end-of-chain 

[EOC] , end-of-sequence [EOS] ), and mt,i = −∞ other-wise. This constrains the generation to valid vertex walks along mesh edges, ensuring each chain is edge-aligned by construction without requiring post-hoc projection. Fig. 4 illustrates this mesh-native graph traversal process, show-ing how the decoder selects the next vertex from the 1-ring neighborhood of the current position. 

3.5. Training and Inference 

Training. We supervise MeshTailor with ground-truth UV layouts from professional datasets. For each mesh, we convert the unordered seam edges into a deterministic target sequence τ using the canonical ordering strategy described in Sec. 3.2. The sequence consists of vertex indices sepa-rated by [EOC] tokens and terminated by an [EOS] token. We train the model to minimize the negative log-likelihood of the next token: 

LAR = − X

> t

log p(τt+1 | τ≤t, Z), (3) where Z represents the global shape context. This formu-lation effectively learns the conditional distribution of seam paths given the mesh geometry and topology. 

Inference. During inference, we compute the encoder embeddings and generate seams autoregressively. Start-ing with a distribution over all vertices, the model sam-ples a start vertex and then walks along mesh edges, where the neighbor mask constrains each step, until it predicts 

[EOC] . This process repeats until [EOS] is generated. Ad-ditional details, including high-level inference pseudocode, are provided in the Supplemental Material (Section B.3.5). 

# 4. Experimental Results 

We validate MeshTailor on two datasets, demonstrat-ing that our mesh-native approach produces significantly more coherent and production-friendly seam layouts than optimization-based and learning-based baselines. 

4.1. Implementation Details 

Datasets and preprocessing. We train and evaluate on two large-scale datasets: TexVerse [56] and GarmentCode-Data [15]. After filtering for high-quality UV layouts, decomposing into part-level components, and removing trivial shapes, we obtain 300K part-level and 110K gar-ment samples. We split each dataset into 90%/5%/5% for train/validation/test. See Supplemental Material A.1 for complete preprocessing details. 

Supervision and training. We extract seam edges from UV layouts using Blender’s seam extraction operator [3], trace them into chains, and apply canonical ordering (Sup-plemental Material Alg. 1). We train with AdamW (learning rate 10 −4, batch size 64) for 30 epochs on 8 NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs, sampling 2,048 surface points per mesh. Since we decode seams as vertex indices rather than 3D coordi-nates, the autoregressive sequences are considerably shorter in practice; we cap the decoding length at Tmax = 400 in all experiments. The point-cloud encoder is pretrained and frozen; we train the graph encoder and MeshTailor Trans-former end-to-end. 

4.2. Evaluation Protocol and Metrics 

UV seams affect both parameterization distortion and the usability of the resulting charts. For evaluation, after seam generation, our method flattens each chart into the UV domain using ABF++ [35]. We evaluate along four complementary axes: (i) Distortion , following the Par-tUV [46], including overall (area) distortion aggregated from triangle-wise area stretch over the atlas, and angular distortion measuring conformality; (ii) UV island quality ,measured by compactness 4π area /perimeter 2 and con-vexity area /area(convex hull) ; (iii) Seam properties , in-cluding normalized seam length (total seam length divided by 3D surface area) and boundary smoothness/jaggedness 

of UV chart outlines, computed as the mean discrete curva-ture proxy κi = ∥pi−1 − 2pi + pi+1 ∥2 on uniformly re-sampled UV boundary loops (lower is smoother); and (iv) 

Structural complexity , measured by the number of charts 

(UV islands). See Supplemental Material Sec. C.1 for im-plementation details. Figure 5. Seam layout and area distortion comparison on GarmentCodeData [15]. For each method, we show the predicted seams on the 3D mesh (left) and the corresponding area distortion heatmap on the UV layout (right). While prior methods often produce fragmented or jagged cuts that lead to irregular UV islands, MeshTailor generates cleaner, garment-aligned seam structures with coherent chains and loops, resulting in more regular, compact UV charts while maintaining competitive distortion. Different colors in our seam visualizations indicate distinct seam chains (and loop cuts), highlighting the structured and editable output of our representation. 

4.3. Comparison with Baselines 

Baselines. We compare against representative methods spanning several widely used pipelines in production toolchains, optimization-based cutting, and learned param-eterization: xatlas [13] (greedy charting with LSCM flatten-ing), Blender Smart UV Project [4] (bottom-up chart clus-tering guided by local normals), OptCuts [17] (joint cut-and-distortion optimization under global constraints), Nuvo [39] (learned continuous UV field), and PartUV [46] (part-aware UV pipeline with reduced chart counts). 

Quantitative results Table 1 summarizes results on Tex-Verse and GarmentCodeData. Across both datasets, our method achieves a favorable trade-off between distortion 

and production usability . While xatlas achieves the lowest distortion, it produces highly fragmented UV layouts with many small charts. Compared to Blender and xatlas, our method produces substantially fewer charts while signifi-cantly improving island regularity (compactness/convexity) and reducing seam jaggedness, at the cost of slightly higher but still competitive distortion. Compared to PartUV, our method yields more mesh-aligned and structurally coher-ent (longer chains, smoother boundaries), resulting in is-lands that are easier to edit in standard digital content cre-ation (DCC) tools. Optimization-based baselines (OptCuts, Nuvo) can reduce chart counts, but they often incur signifi-cantly higher runtimes and may still generate seam bound-aries that are not aligned with production seam conventions (e.g., overly irregular or difficult-to-edit boundaries). 

Qualitative comparison Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 compare pre-dicted seam layouts and the corresponding UV area distor-tion heatmaps across methods. Blender and xatlas tend to introduce many small charts with jagged boundaries, which complicates texture painting and increases visible disconti-nuities; notably, xatlas achieves low overall distortion but at Figure 6. Seam layout and UV area distortion comparison on TexVerse [56]. We qualitatively compare MeshTailor with OptCuts, xatlas, Nuvo, Blender Smart UV Project, and PartUV on diverse assets from TexVerse. Compared to existing baselines that often produce fragmented charts or jagged cut boundaries, MeshTailor generates cleaner, mesh-aligned seams with coherent long-range chain/loop struc-tures while maintaining competitive distortion. Different colors in our results denote distinct seam chains/loops, highlighting the structured and editable seam representation. Table 1. Quantitative comparison on TexVerse and Garment-CodeData. Note that Nuvo is evaluated on 100 randomly sampled meshes due to runtime, while all other methods use the full test set. We additionally report GT on both datasets, where GT denotes seams extracted from the dataset UV layouts and is shown only as an extra reference. For each metric, the top-3 results among the compared methods are highlighted as best , second , and third .                                                                                                   

> TexVerse
> Method Overall Dist ↓
> Angular Dist ↑
> #Charts ↓
> Island Compact ↑
> Island Convex ↑
> SeamLen /Area ↓
> Boundary Jagged ↓
> Blender 1.182 0.753 48.893 0.287 0.753 6.356 1.313 xatlas 1.087 0.975 47.100 0.412 0.752 6.785 1.092 PartUV 1.134 0.953 16.248 0.385 0.742 4.195 1.061 OptCuts 1.139 0.887 1.6 0.309 0.739 2.190 1.192
> Nuvo ∗4.749 0.846 6.42 0.583 0.854 5.628 1.448 Ours 1.218 0.927 8.631 0.541 0.840 2.784 0.686 GT 1.193 0.945 9.021 0.572 0.847 2.837 0.641
> GarmentCodeData
> Method Overall Dist ↓
> Angular Dist ↑
> #Charts ↓
> Island Compact ↑
> Island Convex ↑
> SeamLen /Area ↓
> Boundary Jagged ↓
> Blender 1.147 0.938 74.265 0.203 0.820 6.513 1.440 xatlas 1.064 0.974 51.648 0.358 0.783 5.930 1.188 PartUV 1.113 0.969 5.198 0.438 0.789 1.730 0.882 OptCuts 1.082 0.937 1.09 0.328 0.763 0.729 1.050
> Nuvo ∗2.366 0.956 6.49 0.352 0.803 6.423 2.310 Ours 1.097 0.970 10.414 0.591 0.887 2.25 0.485 GT 1.095 0.972 11.449 0.592 0.891 2.398 0.473

the cost of highly fragmented charts. PartUV reduces chart counts by leveraging part priors, yet its seam boundaries can remain irregular, limiting downstream editing. Opt-Cuts produces extremely few charts with short seams, but the resulting islands can be less regular and its boundaries remain less clean than ours. Nuvo often yields less sta-ble seam layouts with higher distortion and boundary irreg-ularities. In contrast, our method produces mesh-aligned seam chains that form coherent long-range structures (in-cluding loop cuts), leading to cleaner, more regular UV is-lands with smoother, more editable boundaries while main-taining competitive distortion. 

User study. We conducted a 2AFC user study with 100 participants comparing seam layouts across methods based on minimization, concealment, and geometry awareness (5,000 pairwise votes). We summarize the results as a pair-wise preference matrix (Fig. 7). For each ordered pair of methods (A, B ), we report the preference rate p(A ≻ B) =  

> nA
> nA+nB

∈ [0 , 1] , where nA (respectively nB ) is the number of votes favoring method A (respectively B) in direct com-parisons between A and B. Thus, p(A ≻ B) > 0.5 indi-cates that participants preferred A over B, and p(B ≻ A) = 1 − p(A ≻ B) by construction. We do not apply statistical significance tests since the preference margins are consis-tently large (near-unanimous in most comparisons). Mesh-

Figure 7. Left: pairwise preference rates between methods, where each entry reports the fraction of participants favoring the row method over the column method. Right: overall ranking by aver-age win-rate against all other methods. MeshTailor is consistently preferred over all baselines. 

Figure 8. UV quality under a tiling stripe texture. Fragmented charts and irregular boundaries often cause stripe discontinuities and misalignment, while MeshTailor preserves coherent regions with consistent texture flow. 

Figure 9. Production-oriented UV usability. (a) Our UV layout supports diverse texture appearances on the same garment. (b) Stripe tiling with a user-edited logo, showing results from prior methods. 

Tailor is consistently preferred over all baselines, validating that mesh-native seam chains better match production con-ventions. See Supplemental Material C.2 for details. 

4.4. Applications 

Texture editing and replacement. Fig. 9 evaluates tex-turing workflows. Fig. 9(a) showcases MeshTailor on Figure 10. MeshTailor naturally produces loop cuts as part of its seam structure. Applying the predicted loops (middle), we re-cursively split the input mesh into connected patches with clean, artist-like boundaries, yielding a part decomposition (right) that is directly usable for downstream asset processing. 

the same garment with diverse texture applications (e.g., checkerboard, stylized patterns, and fabric-like materials), illustrating that our layout preserves coherent texture flow over large regions. Fig. 9(b) compares methods under a tiling stripe texture with a user-edited logo: baseline methods with fragmented charts produce stripe discontinu-ities and boundary misalignment, while MeshTailor’s co-herent regions and smoother boundaries enable easier tex-ture placement and logo authoring. 

Loop-induced part segmentation. MeshTailor naturally produces loop cuts as an integral part of its seam structure, which in turn provides a clean, mesh-aligned mechanism for coarse-to-fine surface decomposition. In particular, by prioritizing high-level loops first, our method yields mean-ingful part boundaries (e.g., limb/torso separations on ani-mals or garment component boundaries), and thus directly supports downstream part-aware processing (Fig. 10). 

Generalization across mesh resolutions. Our model is trained on meshes with at most 2,000 triangles. Fig. 11 eval-uates resolution generalization without re-training by apply-ing MeshTailor to meshes with increasing triangle counts (800 → 2,800). Across resolutions, the predicted seams exhibit consistent global structure: major loops and long-range cuts remain in similar locations with coherent con-nectivity. Higher granularity mainly affects fine-scale de-tails (e.g., slight boundary shifts) rather than the high-level cut layout, indicating that our mesh-native, pointer-based traversal is robust to mesh discretization and generalizes be-yond training resolution. 

Stability under vertex jitter. Production assets often un-dergo minor geometry edits during routine asset processing while keeping connectivity unchanged. To probe the sta-bility of seam prediction under such perturbations, we ap-ply isotropic Gaussian jitter to the vertex positions. Fig. 12 shows that MeshTailor produces nearly identical seams un-der perturbations with σ ≤ 0.01 , but may introduce a few        

> Figure 11. MeshTailor generalizes to meshes at different levels of granularity, handling meshes with more triangles than those seen during training.
> Figure 12. We perturb the input mesh by adding Gaussian noise to vertices with increasing σ. Predicted seams remain stable when
> σ < 0.010 and gradually degrade as σincreases, with noticeable extra local cuts at σ= 0 .0125 .

extra cuts when σ = 0 .0125 as geometric cues become less reliable. Overall, these results suggest that our mesh-native decoding yields reproducible seams under the tested vertex jitter settings. 

Scalability via Divide-and-Conquer Decoding Mesh resolution can vary, and pointer decoding becomes costly on dense meshes. To improve scalability, we optionally use a divide-and-conquer scheme (Fig. 13): after generating a seam chain, we test whether it splits the current patch into two connected components; if so, we split the patch and re-cursively decode seams on each sub-mesh. This progres-sively reduces the effective problem size per stage while preserving mesh-aligned seam continuity. 

4.5. Ablation Studies 

Table 2 quantifies the contribution of each component. (i) w/o Enc G: removing the mesh graph encoder degrades seam connectivity and mesh alignment, leading to higher boundary jaggedness and reduced edge alignment. (ii) w/o Enc P : removing the shape semantic encoder weakens global planning, leading to less consistent long-range cut placement and less regular overall seam layouts. 

Coordinate-based generation. To validate our mesh-native design, we compare against coordinate-based genera-tion similar to SeamGPT [19]. We implement two variants: Figure 13. Divide-and-conquer inference. Starting from a high-resolution mesh, MeshTailor predicts a major seam loop to split the surface into disconnected components, then recursively applies the same seam-tracing process to each sub-mesh. This recursion progressively decomposes the asset into semantically coherent parts, yielding clean, edge-aligned seams and the corresponding UV charts. 

Figure 14. Ablation on seam generation. We compare Mesh-Tailor with variants removing Enc G or Enc P , and coordinate-based baselines (Coord-Edge/Coord-Chain). Coordinate predic-tion causes projection artifacts and irregular boundaries, while MeshTailor yields cleaner and more coherent seam layouts in our experiments. Table 2. Ablation study on GarmentCodeData. We report complementary metrics covering distortion, chart complexity, and seam editability. Top-2 are highlighted as best and second .                                       

> Variant Overall Dist ↓
> Angular Dist ↑
> #Charts ↓
> Island Compact ↑
> Island Convex ↑
> SeamLen /Area ↓
> Boundary Jagged ↓
> w/o Enc G1.125 0.972 10.406 0.548 0.865 2.292 0.539 w/o Enc P1.129 0.969 11.281 0.554 0.858 2.316 0.538 Coord-Edge 1.151 0.968 9.287 0.442 0.844 2.325 1.074 Coord-Chain 1.135 0.971 9.987 0.496 0.842 2.281 0.997 Full model 1.097 0.970 10.414 0.591 0.887 2.25 0.485

Coord-Edge predicts seam-edge coordinates, and Coord-Chain predicts chain vertex coordinates, both discretizing coordinates into 128 bins per axis. Since SeamGPT code is unavailable, we follow their approach. Table 2 shows that coordinate prediction degrades edge alignment. Predicted points often fall between vertices, requiring snapping that produces irregular boundaries (Fig. 14). The coordinate ap-proach increases sequence length by 3.4 × to 5.1 × and ex-pands the output space from local neighborhoods (5-6 can-didates) to 128 bins, making learning harder. Overall, each component is necessary to achieve mesh-native, production-friendly seam structures. 

# 5. Conclusion and Future Work 

We have presented MeshTailor , the first mesh-native gen-erative framework for synthesizing edge-aligned UV seams directly on 3D mesh graphs. By operating intrinsically on mesh topology, our approach eliminates projection artifacts and guarantees edge-aligned, continuous seam boundaries by construction. Our key innovations include 

ChainingSeams , a hierarchical serialization scheme, and a dual-stream encoder with pointer-based graph traver-sal. Together, they enable autoregressive models to learn professional seam placement while ensuring mesh-native, edge-aligned generation. Extensive evaluations show that MeshTailor produces significantly more coherent, less fragmented seam layouts compared to optimization-based methods and recent neural baselines, achieving a superior trade-off between geometric distortion and production us-ability. 

Limitations and Future Work. Our framework currently focuses on low-polygon meshes (up to ∼2,000 triangles). While it can be applied to meshes beyond this range, scaling to substantially higher-resolution inputs typically requires additional hierarchical decomposition strategies (e.g., our optional divide-and-conquer inference). Future directions include extending to interactive seam editing with user con-straints, integrating distortion-aware objectives into train-ing, and applying mesh-native graph traversal principles to other decomposition tasks such as remeshing and mesh seg-mentation. References 

[1] Noam Aigerman, Kunal Gupta, Vladimir G. Kim, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Jun Saito, and Thibault Groueix. Neural jaco-bian fields: learning intrinsic mappings of arbitrary meshes. 

ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH) , 41(4):109:1– 109:17, 2022. 2 [2] Manas Bhargava, Camille Schreck, Marco Freire, Pierre-Alexandre Hugron, Sylvain Lefebvre, Silvia Sell´ an, and Bernd Bickel. Mesh simplification for unfolding. In Com-puter Graphics Forum , 2025. 3 [3] Blender. Blender manual: Seams from islands. 

https : / / docs . blender . org / manual / en / latest / modeling / meshes / uv / unwrapping / seams.html . 5, 13 [4] Blender Online Community. Blender — a 3d modelling and rendering package. https://www.blender.org/ . 3, 6[5] Xingyi Du, Danny M. Kaufman, Qingnan Zhou, Shahar Z. Kovalsky, Yajie Yan, Noam Aigerman, and Tao Ju. Optimiz-ing global injectivity for constrained parameterization. ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 40(6):260:1– 260:18, 2021. 2 [6] Matthias Eck, Tony DeRose, Tom Duchamp, Hugues Hoppe, Michael Lounsbery, and Werner Stuetzle. Multiresolution analysis of arbitrary meshes. In Proc. SIGGRAPH , page 173–182, 1995. 2 [7] Slava Elizarov, Ciara Rowles, and Simon Donn´ e. Geome-try image diffusion: Fast and data-efficient text-to-3d with image-based surface representation. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations , 2025. 3 [8] Michael S. Floater. Parametrization and smooth approxima-tion of surface triangulations. Comput. Aided Geom. Des. ,14(3):231–250, 1997. 2 [9] Michael S. Floater. Mean value coordinates. Computer Aided Geometric Design , 20(1):19–27, 2003. 2 [10] William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. In-ductive representation learning on large graphs. In Proc. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1024–1034, 2017. 3, 4 [11] Zekun Hao, David W. Romero, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Yu Liu. Meshtron: High-fidelity, artist-like 3d mesh generation at scale, 2024. 3 [12] Kai Hormann, Konrad Polthier, and Alia Sheffer. Mesh pa-rameterization: theory and practice. In ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 Courses , 2008. 1, 2 [13] jpcy. xatlas: Mesh uv unwrapping library. GitHub repository, 2022. 3, 6 [14] Dan Julius, Vladislav Kraevoy, and Alla Sheffer. D-charts: Quasi-developable mesh segmentation. Computer Graphics Forum , 24(3), 2005. 3 [15] Maria Korosteleva, Timur Levent Kesdogan, Fabian Kem-per, Stephan Wenninger, Jasmin Koller, Yuhan Zhang, Mario Botsch, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Garmentcodedata: A dataset of 3d made-to-measure garments with sewing pat-terns. In Proc. Euro. Conf. on Computer Vision , pages 110– 127, 2024. 5, 6, 13 [16] Bruno L´ evy, Sylvain Petitjean, Nicolas Ray, and J´ erome Maillot. Least squares conformal maps for automatic tex-ture atlas generation. ACM Trans. on Graphics , 21(3):362:1– 362:10, 2002. 2 [17] Minchen Li, Danny M. Kaufman, Vladimir G. Kim, Justin Solomon, and Alla Sheffer. Optcuts: joint optimization of surface cuts and parameterization. ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 37(6):247:1–247:13, 2018. 1, 2, 6 [18] Siran Li, Ruiyang Liu, Chen Liu, Zhendong Wang, Gaofeng He, Yong-Lu Li, Xiaogang Jin, and Huamin Wang. Garma-genet: A multimodal generative framework for sewing pat-tern design and generic garment modeling. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics (TOG) , 44(6):1–23, 2025. 3 [19] Yang Li, Victor Cheung, Xinhai Liu, Yuguang Chen, Zhongjin Luo, Biwen Lei, Haohan Weng, Zibo Zhao, Jing-wei Huang, Zhuo Chen, and Chunchao Guo. Auto-regressive surface cutting, 2025. 2, 3, 9 [20] Ming-Yu Liu, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Donglai Xiang, Hao Su, Sanja Fidler, Nicholas Sharp, and Jun Gao. PARTFIELD: learning 3d feature fields for part segmentation and beyond. 2025. 3 [21] Richard Liu, Noam Aigerman, Vladimir G. Kim, and Rana Hanocka. DA wand: Distortion-aware selection using neural mesh parameterization. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. on Com-puter Vision & Pattern Recognition , pages 16739–16749, 2023. 3 [22] Songrun Liu, Zachary Ferguson, Alec Jacobson, and Yotam Gingold. Seamless: seam erasure and seam-aware decou-pling of shape from mesh resolution. ACM Trans. on Graph-ics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 36(6):216:1–216:15, 2017. 13 [23] Xueqi Ma, Yilin Liu, Wenjun Zhou, Ruowei Wang, and Hui Huang. Generating 3d house wireframes with semantics. In 

ECCV , pages 223–240, 2024. 3 [24] Xueqi Ma, Yilin Liu, Tianlong Gao, Qirui Huang, and Hui Huang. Clr-wire: Towards continuous latent representations for 3d curve wireframe generation. In ACM SIGGRAPH ,pages 77:1–77:11, 2025. 3 [25] Paritosh Mittal, Yen-Chi Cheng, Maneesh Singh, and Shub-ham Tulsiani. Autosdf: Shape priors for 3d comple-tion, reconstruction and generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 306–315, 2022. 3 [26] Luca Morreale, Noam Aigerman, Vladimir G. Kim, and Niloy J. Mitra. Neural surface maps. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition , pages 4639–4648, 2021. 2 [27] Patrick Mullen, Yiying Tong, Pierre Alliez, and Mathieu Desbrun. Spectral conformal parameterization. In Proc. Eu-rographics Symp. on Geometry Processing , pages 1487:1– –1487:8, 2008. 2 [28] Charlie Nash, Yaroslav Ganin, S. M. Ali Eslami, and Pe-ter W. Battaglia. Polygen: An autoregressive generative model of 3d meshes. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learn-ing , pages 7220–7229. PMLR, 2020. 3 [29] Roi Poranne, Marco Tarini, Sandro Huber, Daniele Panozzo, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Autocuts: simultaneous dis-tortion and cut optimization for uv mapping. ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 36(6):215:1–215:11, 2017. 2 [30] Michael Rabinovich, Roi Poranne, Daniele Panozzo, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Scalable locally injective mappings. 

ACM Trans. on Graphics , 36(2):16:1–16:16, 2017. 2 [31] Pedro V. Sander, John Snyder, Steven J. Gortler, and Hugues Hoppe. Texture mapping progressive meshes. In Proc. SIG-GRAPH , pages 409:1–416:8, 2001. 3 [32] Rohan Sawhney and Keenan Crane. Boundary first flatten-ing. ACM Trans. on Graphics , 37(1):5:1–5:14, 2017. 2 [33] Nicholas Sharp and Keenan Crane. Variational surface cut-ting. ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH) , 37(4): 156:1–156:13, 2018. 2 [34] Alla Sheffer and Eric De Sturler. Surface parameterization for meshing by triangulation flattening, 2000. 2 [35] Alla Sheffer, Bruno L´ evy, Maxim Mogilnitsky, and Alexan-der Bogomyakov. Abf++: fast and robust angle based flat-tening. ACM Trans. on Graphics , 24(2):311:1–311:20, 2005. 2, 5 [36] Alla Sheffer, Emil Praun, and Kenneth Rose. Mesh param-eterization methods and their applications. Found. Trends. Comput. Graph. Vis. , 2(2):105–171, 2006. 1 [37] Yawar Siddiqui, Antonio Alliegro, Alexey Artemov, Tatiana Tommasi, Daniele Sirigatti, Vladislav Rosov, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. Meshgpt: Generating triangle meshes with decoder-only transformers. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition , pages 19615– 19625, 2024. 3 [38] O. Sorkine, D. Cohen-Or, R. Goldenthal, and D. Lischin-ski. Bounded-distortion piecewise mesh parameterization. In 

IEEE Visualization, 2002. VIS 2002. , pages 355–362, 2002. 2[39] Pratul P. Srinivasan, Stephan J. Garbin, Dor Verbin, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Nuvo: Neural uv mapping for unruly 3d representations. In Proc. Euro. Conf. on Computer Vision , pages 18–34, 2024. 1, 2, 6 [40] Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2023. 15 [41] Qwen Team. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 , 2025. 13 [42] Fatemeh Teimury, Bruno Roy, Juan Sebasti´ an Casallas, David MacDonald, and Mark Coates. Graphseam: Super-vised graph learning framework for semantic uv mapping, 2020. 3 [43] William Thomas Tutte. How to draw a graph. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , 3(1):743–767, 1963. 2 [44] Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. In Proc. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems , page 2692–2700, 2015. 2 [45] Zhengyi Wang, Jonathan Lorraine, Yikai Wang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Sanja Fidler, and Xiaohui Zeng. Llama-mesh: Unifying 3d mesh generation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09595 , 2024. 3 [46] Zhaoning Wang, Xinyue Wei, Ruoxi Shi, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Hao Su, and Minghua Liu. Partuv: Part-based uv unwrap-ping of 3d meshes. In Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia , pages 15:1– 15:12, 2025. 2, 3, 5, 6, 16 [47] Si-Tong Wei, Rui-Huan Wang, Chuan-Zhi Zhou, Baoquan Chen, and Peng-Shuai Wang. Octgpt: Octree-based multi-scale autoregressive models for 3d shape generation. In Pro-ceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graph-ics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Pa-pers , pages 1–11, 2025. 3 [48] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506 , 2024. 3 [49] Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany, Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico Tombari, James Tomp-kin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in visual computing and beyond. In Computer graphics forum ,pages 641–676. Wiley Online Library, 2022. 3 [50] Duoteng Xu, Yuguang Chen, Jing Li, Xinhai Liu, Xueqi Ma, Zhuo Chen, Dongyu Zhang, and Chunchao Guo. Seam-crafter: Enhancing mesh seam generation for artist uv un-wrapping via reinforcement learning, 2025. 3 [51] Xingguang Yan, Liqiang Lin, Niloy J. Mitra, Dani Lischin-ski, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Hui Huang. Shapeformer: Transformer-based shape completion via sparse representa-tion. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision & Pat-tern Recognition , pages 6229–6239, 2022. 3 [52] Xingguang Yan, Han-Hung Lee, Ziyu Wan, and Angel X. Chang. An object is worth 64x64 pixels: Generating 3d ob-ject via image diffusion, 2024. 3 [53] Yunhan Yang, Yukun Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Liangjun Lu, Xiaoyang Wu, Edmund Y Lam, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xihui Liu. Sampart3d: Segment any part in 3d objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07184 , 2024. 3 [54] Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Nießner, and Peter Wonka. 3dshape2vecset: A 3d shape representation for neu-ral fields and generative diffusion models. ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH) , 42(4):92:1–92:16, 2023. 3 [55] Qijian Zhang, Junhui Hou, Wenping Wang, and Ying He. Flatten anything: unsupervised neural surface parameteriza-tion. In Proc. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , pages 93–113, 2024. 1, 2 [56] Yibo Zhang, Li Zhang, Rui Ma, and Nan Cao. Texverse: A universe of 3d objects with high-resolution textures, 2025. 5, 7, 13 [57] Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xin Chen, Xianfang Zeng, Rui Wang, Pei Cheng, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, Gang Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Michelangelo: conditional 3d shape generation based on shape-image-text aligned latent representation. In Proc. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. 5, 15 [58] Kun Zhou, John Synder, Baining Guo, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Iso-charts: stretch-driven mesh parameterization us-ing spectral analysis. In Proc. Eurographics Symp. on Ge-ometry Processing , pages 45–54, 2004. 3 MeshTailor: Cutting Seams via Generative Mesh Traversal 

# Supplemental Material 

# Xueqi Ma 1 Xingguang Yan 2 Congyue Zhang 1 Hui Huang 1* 1Shenzhen University 2Simon Fraser University 

This supplementary material complements the main pa-per with additional technical and experimental details. It in-cludes: (i) dataset preprocessing and seam extraction from UV layouts (Sec. A.1); (ii) extended method details on seam-chain representation, canonical ordering, and archi-tecture (Sec. B.1–B.3); (iii) complete evaluation protocols, including metric definitions, user study (Sec. C.1–C.2); and (iv) additional visualizations of distortion and UV layouts (Sec. C.3). We also provide further analysis of coordinate-based decoding baselines (Sec. C.4), additional qualitative results (Sec. C.5), and representative failure cases and limi-tations (Sec. C.6). 

# A. Data 

A.1. Data Processing 

Dataset sources. We train and evaluate on two large-scale datasets covering diverse assets: TexVerse [56] and Gar-mentCodeData [15]. 

TexVerse preprocessing. For TexVerse, we first filter for high-quality UV layouts by checking for valid per-corner UV coordinates and ensuring all faces have consistent UV mappings. We then decompose each mesh into part-level connected components to match production assets where seams are authored per part. To reduce bias toward trivial cases, we discard parts with fewer than 256 triangles. We cap the training resolution at 2,000 triangles; meshes ex-ceeding this limit are decimated [22] to below 2,000 while preserving geometric detail. Finally, we convert meshes to manifold surfaces using standard mesh repair operations to ensure consistent topology. 

VLM-based filtering. We further remove overly simple primitives (e.g., cuboids, cylinders, spheres) using a VLM (Qwen3-VL [41]). These cases provide little seam-structure diversity and can dominate training, biasing the model to-ward trivial solutions. The VLM is prompted to classify whether a mesh is a simple geometric primitive based on a 

2 × 2 grid of four rendered views. 

Seam extraction from UV layouts. Given per-corner UV coordinates, we extract seam edges as mesh edges whose 

> ∗Corresponding author.

shared endpoints are not UV-glued across the two incident faces (up to orientation). Specifically, for each mesh edge 

e = (va, v b) shared by two faces f1 and f2, we check whether the UV coordinates of va and vb differ across 

f1 and f2. If they differ, the edge is marked as a seam edge. In practice, we use Blender’s seam extraction opera-tor bpy.ops.uv.seams from islands() [3] to ob-tain seam edges S.

# B. Method Details 

B.1. Detailed Seam Chain Representation 

Seam as an edge set. In UV unwrapping, seams indicate mesh edges along which the surface is cut to produce one or multiple UV charts. We formalize a seam layout as an edge subset S ⊆ E . Equivalently, each edge e ∈ E can be assigned a binary label ye ∈ { 0, 1} with ye = I[e ∈ S ].However, treating seams as independent edge labels under-specifies their global structure . In practice, seams must ex-hibit coherent connectivity (continuity, frequent loop struc-tures, and strong coupling to the underlying triangulation). To model such structure explicitly, we adopt a serialized 

seam chain representation amenable to autoregressive gen-eration. 

Seam chain. We represent a seam layout as a set of seam chains C. Our supervision starts from the extracted seam-edge set S (Sec. A.1), which we decompose into C by trac-ing maximal edge-connected paths on the seam subgraph, covering both open chains and closed loop cuts, and use them as training targets throughout. Formally, a seam chain is a vertex sequence c = ( v1, v 2, . . . , v T ) with vt ∈ V that forms a walk on the mesh: 

(vt, v t+1 ) ∈ E , ∀t ∈ { 1, . . . , T − 1}. (4) It induces an ordered seam-edge list {(vt, v t+1 )}T −1 

> t=1

. We denote a loop cut as a special chain whose start and end co-incide, i.e., v1 = vT . Loop cuts are prevalent in artist seam annotations (e.g., rings around limbs or torso junctions), and our chain formalism supports them naturally in practice. 

Mesh-native validity via neighbor masking. Eq. (4) im-plies a simple but powerful constraint: the next vertex must be adjacent to the current vertex. In our decoder, we enforce this mesh-native constraint by masking the pointer distribu-tion to the 1-ring neighbors of the current vertex, ensuring that every generated chain is edge-aligned by construction. 

B.2. Detailed Formulation of Canonical Ordering 

Ordering principle: loop-first, balance-first, large-patch-first. To serialize the unordered set C into a de-terministic sequence, we prioritize loop cuts that balance 

surface area and focus refinement on the largest remaining patch . We define an iterative divide process over the mesh surface (or current patch) using candidate loop cuts. The or-dering follows a coarse-to-fine process: we first place a few primary loop cuts that decompose the largest patch, then progressively refine smaller parts. 

Problem setting. Let P be a set of disjoint connected patches, initialized as P ← {M} . Let L be the set of loop-cut candidates extracted from C. At each iteration, we select a patch to refine and choose the next loop within that patch. 

Loop candidates within a patch. For a patch P ∈ P ,we collect internal loop candidates 

LP = {L ∈ L | L ⊂ P, L is not coincident with ∂P }.

(5) Cutting P along L ∈ L P splits P into two connected sub-patches P (1)  

> L

and P (2)  

> L

with areas A(1)  

> L

= Area( P (1)  

> L

) and 

A(2)  

> L

= Area( P (2)  

> L

).

Area-balance score. We define the balance score 

r(L; P ) = min( A(1)  

> L

, A (2)  

> L

)max( A(1)  

> L

, A (2)  

> L

) ∈ (0 , 1] , (6) where values closer to 1 indicate a more even split. We choose the loop with maximal balance within the selected patch. 

Patch selection. We always refine the patch with the largest area at each iteration: 

P ⋆ = arg max   

> P∈P

Area( P ). (7) Intuitively, large patches dominate potential distortion and visual impact; prioritizing them matches common artist practice and yields stable coarse-to-fine decomposition. 

Iterative ordering. We repeatedly (i) select P ⋆ by Eq. (7), (ii) pick the next loop cut L⋆ as 

L⋆ = arg max 

> L∈L P ⋆

r(L; P ⋆), (8) (iii) append L⋆ to the ordered chain list, and (iv) split P ⋆

into the two sub-patches induced by L⋆ and update P. If 

LP ⋆ = ∅, we remove P ⋆ from P and continue with the next-largest patch. Each loop cut is used at most once by removing L⋆ from L after selection. After all loop cuts are ordered, we append the remaining open chains in C (i.e., 

O) by a deterministic rule (e.g., sorting by decreasing chain                                                                                   

> ALGORITHM 1: Canonical ordering of seam chains (loops-first, balance-first, large-patch-first)
> Input: mesh M; seam chains C
> Output: ordered chain list Seq
> L ← { c∈ C | cis a loop cut }O ← C \ L // open chains
> P ← {M} ;Seq ←[ ] // patches /ordered
> while P̸ =∅do
> P⋆←arg max P∈P Area( P)// largest patch
> LP⋆← { L∈ L | L⊂P⋆, L ̸⊂∂P ⋆}
> // internal loops
> if LP⋆=∅then
> P ← P \ { P⋆};
> continue end
> L⋆←arg max L∈L P ⋆r(L;P⋆)// Eq. (6)
> Seq .append( L⋆)(P1, P 2)←Split( P⋆, L ⋆)// cut P⋆along
> L⋆
> P ← (P \ { P⋆})∪ { P1, P 2}L ← L \ { L⋆}// use each loop once
> end
> Seq .extend  Sort( O)// open chains: by decreasing length
> return Seq

length), yielding a complete deterministic sequence. This ordering converts the original set C into an autoregressive supervision signal and makes inference reproducible (Al-gorithm 1). 

B.3. Architecture 

This section details the architecture of our method, a mesh-native seam generator that predicts seam chains as an au-toregressive stream of vertex selections , with two special symbols [EOC] and [EOS] indicating end-of-chain and end-of-seams, respectively. 

B.3.1. Inputs, Tokenization, and Candidate Space 

Given a mesh M = ( V, E, F) with |V| = N vertices, the network additionally takes a point cloud P ∈ RNp×6 sam-pled on the surface, where each point stores (x, y, z ) and its normal (nx, n y , n z ). We represent the target seam layout as an index sequence {τt}Tt=1 , where each τt is either a ver-tex index in {0, . . . , N − 1} or one of the special symbols 

[EOC] / [EOS] .To unify pointer decoding, we construct a candidate set 

that contains all vertices plus two special candidates. In our implementation, we place the two special candidates before vertices: 

U = {[EOC] , [EOS] } ∪ V ,

and use a consistent offset mapping so that vertex indices are shifted by +2 in the candidate space. Concretely, we Figure 15. Graph Encoder. We embed each vertex with coordinate-based point features and apply a stack of GraphSAGE layers with SiLU and LayerNorm to aggregate neighborhood in-formation, producing per-vertex connectivity-aware embeddings used for seam generation. 

map a vertex id v ∈ [0 , N −1] to candidate id (v + 2) , while 

[EOC] and [EOS] are mapped to candidate ids 0 and 1,respectively. 

B.3.2. Encoding 

We compute the final per-vertex embeddings in three stages: (i) coordinate-based vertex features, (ii) connectivity-aware aggregation on the mesh graph, and (iii) global shape se-mantics from the point cloud. 

Coordinate-based vertex features. Each vertex coordi-nate vi ∈ R6 is first embedded by a Fourier feature encoder 

ϕ(·). We concatenate the embedding with the raw coordi-nates and project it into a learnable point feature: 

pi = MLP  [ϕ(vi), vi] ∈ Rdp ,

where dp = 384 in our default setting. 

Mesh connectivity encoder. To explicitly capture mesh-dependent seam decisions, we encode mesh connectivity with a multi-layer GraphSAGE encoder (Fig. 15). Given mesh faces, we derive an undirected edge list E and per-form message passing over the resulting adjacency graph. Starting from the coordinate-based vertex features pi, we stack multiple GraphSAGE layers: 

h(g, 0)  

> i

= pi, h(g, ℓ +1)  

> i

= SAGEConv (ℓ) h(g, ℓ ), E

> i

,

where each layer is followed by SiLU and LayerNorm 

for stable optimization. In our default setting, the hidden widths are set to [64, 128, 256, 512] , producing the final connectivity-aware vertex embedding hgi ∈ R512 .

Raw-coordinate fusion. We additionally concatenate the final graph feature with the raw Fourier point feature and project them to the model dimension d:

hi = Wf [hgi , pi] ∈ Rd,

with d = 512 . This fusion retains accurate coordinate cues while still benefiting from connectivity reasoning. 

Pretrained shape encoder. We extract global shape se-mantics from the surface point cloud using a pretrained point-cloud encoder [57]. It outputs a set of shape tokens 

Z ∈ RM ×d, where d matches the model dimension. Dur-ing training, the shape encoder parameters are frozen by de-fault. 

Shape-to-vertex cross-attention. Finally, we inject global shape context into vertex embeddings using across-attention stack: 

˜hi = CrossAttn  hi, Z,

where we use a small depth (2 layers by default) to keep the overhead minimal while enabling global context aggre-gation. The resulting ˜hi ∈ Rd serves as the final per-vertex token representation. 

B.3.3. Autoregressive Decoder 

Given vertex tokens {˜hi}, our decoder predicts the next el-ement in the seam stream by pointing to candidates in U.

Candidate Embeddings. We build candidate embed-dings by concatenating two learned special embeddings with the per-vertex embeddings: 

Cands = [ e[EOC] , e[EOS] , ˜h0, . . . , ˜hN −1] ∈ R(N +2) ×d.

A candidate mask is built accordingly, marking valid ver-tices and always allowing the special candidates. 

Decoder input and positional encoding. We use adecoder-only Transformer with 6 layers and model dimen-sion 512, and apply rotary positional embeddings (RoPE) [40] to encode token order. In addition, we introduce a chain-local positional embedding that resets after every 

[EOC] to encode within-chain progress. Let πt denote the number of steps since the most recent [EOC] (starting from 

0 at each chain start). We add 

˜et ← et + PosEmb chain  

> πt

,

which helps the model distinguish early versus late vertices inside the current chain, independently of the global decod-ing index. 

Conditioned decoding on shape context. At each step, the decoder attends to the previously generated token em-beddings and is conditioned on the shape context tokens Z.Denoting the decoder hidden state at step t as qt ∈ Rd, we compute it as 

qt = Decoder(˜ e≤t; Z),

which improves long-range decisions such as globally meaningful loop placement and cross-part consistency. Pointer projection. We compute logits over candidates via dot-product attention: 

ℓt,u = ⟨qt, W˜hi⟩.

B.3.4. Neighbor-Constrained Decoding at Inference 

During inference, we restrict the pointer choices using a dy-namic candidate mask to enforce edge-aligned traversal and prevent degenerate jumps. We perform autoregressive sam-pling with temperature τ = 0 .1. We precompute a 1-ring neighbor table for each vertex and apply the following rules based on the last predicted token τt:• If τt = [EOC] , we start a new chain and only allow valid vertices as the next token. • If τt is a vertex, we only allow its 1-ring neighbors as candidates and additionally allow [EOC] and [EOS] . To avoid immediate backtracking, we remove the previous vertex from the neighbor set when applicable. • If τt = [EOS] , generation terminates. This neighbor-constrained mask makes every decoded step mesh-native by construction. It also reduces the per-step candidate set from O(N ) to a small local subset, which significantly improves stability and sampling efficiency on dense meshes. 

B.3.5. Inference Pseudocode 

Algorithm 2 summarizes the inference-time decoding pro-cedure of MeshTailor. Starting from the encoded mesh and shape features, the model generates seam chains in an au-toregressive manner by repeatedly selecting vertices under a dynamic neighbor mask. This masking enforces edge-aligned traversal, ensuring mesh-native generation without post-hoc projection. 

# C. Experiments 

C.1. Metric Details 

UV seams influence downstream parameterization along multiple (often competing) axes, e.g., distortion versus chart fragmentation and boundary regularity. Therefore, distor-tion alone is insufficient to fully reflect production usability. We evaluate along four complementary axes: 

Distortion metrics. Following PartUV [46], we report multiple distortion measures that quantify how UV map-ping deforms the surface: • Overall distortion : Measures global area distortion by aggregating triangle-wise area stretch over the entire UV atlas. • Angular distortion : Measures how much the angles are distorted in the UV mapping, reflecting conformality. These metrics reflect both area and angle preservation.                                                

> ALGORITHM 2: MeshTailor inference
> Input: Manifold mesh M= ( V,E,F)
> Output: Seam chains C(edge-aligned by construction)
> {hi} ← Enc G(M);Z←Enc P(M);
> ˜hi←CrossAttn( hi,Z);Initialize empty chain list C;
> while not [EOS] do
> Compute start-vertex distribution over V(no neighbor mask); Select v1∈ V by sample; Initialize current chain c←(v1);
> while not [EOC] do
> Compute pointer distribution with neighbor mask (Eq. 2); Select next token τby sample/argmax; Let vt+1 ←τand append it:
> c←(v1, . . . , v t+1 );
> t←t+ 1 ;
> end
> Append cto C;
> end return C;

UV island quality metrics. To capture whether islands are regular and easy to pack/edit , we measure: • Compactness : Defined as 4π · area /perimeter 2. This metric ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating a perfect cir-cle. Higher values indicate more compact shapes. • Convexity : Island area divided by its convex-hull area. This ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 is perfectly convex. These metrics favor compact and convex shapes, penalizing elongated, highly concave, and jagged islands that compli-cate packing and manual editing in UV authoring tools. 

Seam properties. We measure seam characteristics: • Seam length / 3D area : Total seam length normalized by surface area. Lower values indicate more efficient cuts. • Jaggedness/smoothness : While seam regularity is de-fined on the cut graph in 3D, after unwrapping, the cut graph manifests as the UV chart boundaries (i.e., island outlines). We therefore evaluate seam smoothness by measuring the boundary regularity of UV islands. Con-cretely, we extract island boundary loops in the UV do-main, resample each loop at uniform arc-length steps, and compute a discrete curvature proxy κi = ∥pi−1 −

2pi+pi+1 ∥2 (cyclic indexing) on the resampled sequence 

{pi}. We report the mean κ over all boundary samples; lower values indicate smoother, less jagged seams. These metrics directly reflect seam editability and overall boundary regularity. Smoother seams are generally easier for artists to manipulate and adjust. Figure 16. Coordinate-to-mesh projection. Coordinate-based seams can look plausible in Euclidean space, but snapping them to the input mesh often induces jagged boundaries and may collapse onto the wrong surface sheet under nearby/interpenetrating geom-etry, leading to disconnections.   

> Figure 17. User study interface. We present participants with paired seam layout results (including seam visualizations on the 3D mesh and the corresponding UV maps) and ask them to choose the higher-quality option in a 2AFC setting, following the pro-vided criteria (minimization, concealment, and geometry aware-ness).

Structural complexity. We report the number of charts (UV islands) as a proxy for cut complexity. Fewer charts are generally preferable in production, provided that distortion and boundary quality remain acceptable. Fewer charts mean fewer discontinuities and easier texture painting workflows. 

C.2. User Study Details 

Study design. We conducted a two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) user study comparing seam layouts across different methods. Seam quality is partly governed by pro-duction conventions (e.g., visibility and editability) that are not fully captured by distortion metrics. 

Participant recruitment. We recruited 100 participants through an online crowdsourcing platform. Participants were screened to ensure basic familiarity with 3D graphics and UV mapping concepts. 

Study protocol. In each trial, participants were shown two results of the same 3D model processed by two dif-ferent methods, including both the seam visualization (ren-dered on the 3D mesh) and the resulting UV map layout (Fig. 17). Participants selected the seam layout they considered higher quality, following three explicit criteria: • Minimization : Fewer visually apparent cuts on the 3D surface. • Concealment : Cuts placed in less salient regions (e.g., underside, back, natural boundaries). • Geometry awareness : Seams following natural geomet-ric or structural boundaries rather than arbitrary paths. 

Study scale. Each participant completed 50 randomized pairwise comparisons. Comparisons were balanced across method pairs to ensure each pair received approximately equal coverage. In total, we collected responses from 100 participants, yielding 5,000 votes. 

C.3. UV layout 

We further visualize the final UV layouts produced by each method (Fig. 19, Fig. 20). Each UV island (chart) is as-signed a distinct color to highlight chart count, fragmenta-tion, and boundary regularity, while keeping the same dis-play settings across methods. Compared with optimization-based baselines that often yield overly fragmented atlases (many small charts) or irregular/tortuous boundaries, our method produces fewer and more coherent islands with smoother outlines. This qualitative trend aligns with our quantitative metrics on chart complexity and boundary reg-ularity, and supports the claim that MeshTailor generates layouts that are easier to pack and edit in production. 

C.4. Further analysis of coordinate-based decoding 

In the main paper, we include coordinate-based baselines (Coord-Edge/Coord-Chain) to contrast mesh-native pointer decoding with predicting seam geometry via 3D coordi-nates. Here we provide a closer look at a key failure mecha-nism of coordinate-based decoding: the required projection (snapping) from predicted coordinates onto the input mesh. Figure 18. Failure cases. (a) Hair and spiky assets. (b) Extremely low-poly meshes. (c) Decoding errors can derail a chain (red ar-rows). 

Projection-induced jaggedness. Even when predicted segments form a visually plausible wireframe in Euclidean space, converting them into valid seams requires snapping points to mesh vertices/edges. Because the target is a dis-crete mesh, small deviations in predicted coordinates can be amplified by nearest-edge snapping, producing zigzagging and jagged surface boundaries. 

Ambiguity under nearby or interpenetrating surfaces. 

The projection step becomes particularly brittle when dif-ferent surface sheets lie close to each other or interpene-trate (e.g., overlapping trouser legs). In such cases, nearest-surface projection can become ambiguous and may collapse multiple segments onto the same sheet, yielding misplaced or disconnected seams after snapping (Fig. 16). These arti-facts are intrinsic to the projection step and motivate decod-ing seams directly on mesh connectivity. 

C.5. Additional qualitative results. 

To further demonstrate the robustness and generality of MeshTailor beyond the representative examples in the main paper, we provide a gallery of additional results on diverse assets in Fig. 21. The examples span a wide range of shapes and part structures, including thin components, articulated silhouettes, and complex concavities. Across these cases, our method consistently produces clean, coherent seam lay-outs that follow plausible structural boundaries and avoid excessive fragmentation. 

C.6. Failure Cases and Limitations 

Fig. 18 illustrates representative failure cases and current limitations of MeshTailor. 

Hair and highly spiky geometry. We find it challenging to handle hair models or assets with dense, high-frequency spikes (Fig. 18a). Such geometry often contains thin sheets, sharp tips, and closely spaced surface layers, which makes seam placement more brittle. Moreover, hair assets are largely out of distribution for our training data, and their seam conventions are less aligned with garment-like part boundaries. 

Extremely low-poly meshes. MeshTailor may degrade on extremely low-poly meshes (Fig. 18b). When tessella-tion is overly sparse, the mesh graph offers limited degrees of freedom for placing smooth, meaningful seam paths, making seams overly quantized. 

Error propagation in stochastic decoding. Our decoder is probabilistic and generates seam chains autoregressively. An incorrect vertex selection can divert the subsequent walk and corrupt the remainder of the chain (Fig. 18c). In prac-tice, since seams are generated as a set of chains, users can discard the problematic chain and keep the remaining valid ones. Figure 19. UV layout comparison on GarmentCodeData. Each island is shown with a unique color to reveal chart fragmentation and boundary regularity. Figure 20. UV layout comparison on TexVerse. Each island is shown with a unique color to reveal chart fragmentation and boundary regularity. Figure 21. Additional qualitative results. MeshTailor produces coherent seam layouts across diverse categories and shapes. Colored curves denote different predicted seam chains overlaid on the input meshes.