Title: The Role and Relationship of Initialization and Densification in 3D Gaussian Splatting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20714v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:44:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# The Role and Relationship of Initialization and Densification in 3D Gaussian Splatting 

Ivan Desiatov 1,2 and Torsten Sattler 2 

> 1

Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering  

> 2

Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics 

Abstract. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become the method of choice for photo-realistic 3D reconstruction of scenes, due to being able to efficiently and accurately recover the scene appearance and geometry from images. 3DGS represents the scene through a set of 3D Gaussians, parameterized by their position, spatial extent, and view-dependent color. Starting from an initial point cloud, 3DGS refines the Gaussians’ param-eters as to reconstruct a set of training images as accurately as possi-ble. Typically, a sparse Structure-from-Motion point cloud is used as initialization. In order to obtain dense Gaussian clouds, 3DGS meth-ods thus rely on a densification stage. In this paper, we systematically study the relation between densification and initialization. Proposing a new benchmark, we study combinations of different types of initializa-tions (dense laser scans, dense (multi-view) stereo point clouds, dense monocular depth estimates, sparse SfM point clouds) and different den-sification schemes. We show that current densification approaches are not able to take full advantage of dense initialization as they are often unable to (significantly) improve over sparse SfM-based initialization. We will make our benchmark publicly available. 

Keywords: 3D Gaussian Splatting · Novel View Synthesis · Benchmark 

# 1 Introduction 

Accurately reconstructing the 3D structure of a scene from a set of images or a video stream is a long-standing problem in computer vision, with applica-tions in cultural heritage documentation, asset generation for entertainment, and robotics ( e.g ., for path planning and navigation). The field of 3D recon-struction from images has received significant attention in the last few years due to the emergence of efficient learning-based reconstruction techniques, especially neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [33] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20]. Gaussian splatting represents a scene using a collection of 3D Gaussians, each defined by a position, covariance matrix (representing anisotropic scale and orientation), opacity, and a view-dependent color function (typically modeled via spherical harmonics). 3DGS relies on an initial estimate of the Gaussian positions, typically provided by a sparse point cloud obtained from Structure-from-Motion (SfM). A crucial part of any 3DGS approach is thus a densification  

> arXiv:2603.20714v1 [cs.CV] 21 Mar 2026 2I. Desiatov, T. Sattler

stage, which aims to generate more Gaussians in underrepresented areas [13, 16, 20, 21, 30, 47]. Consequently, improving the densification stage has been a research focus [9, 13, 21, 35, 47]. In most cases, the densification strategies have been designed and evaluated on initial positions provided by sparse SfM point clouds or through random sampling. Another line of research, especially in the context of few-view reconstruc-tion [12, 31, 43, 51], where only a few sparsely sampled images of the scene are available, has focused on improving the initialization stage of 3DGS [14, 23, 41]. Examples include using stereo matching [12, 23, 31, 43] and neural radiance fields [14] to obtain denser point clouds as initialization for the 3D Gaussians. To the best of our knowledge, prior work has studied initialization and densi-fication largely independently, and their interaction has not been systematically analyzed. In this work, we aim to close this gap in the literature. In particular, we are interested in answering the question whether better (dense) initialization removes the need for densification, or whether densification still provides value even in such scenarios. To this end, we design a novel benchmark to quantify the impact different initialization strategies (SfM point clouds, "ground truth" point clouds obtained by a laser scanner, and dense point clouds obtained via efficient stereo matching or from monocular depth estimates) have on the performance of 3DGS methods under different densification strategies. Besides the benchmark itself 3, our main contribution is a set of insights drawn from detailed experiments on several novel view synthesis (NVS) datasets: (i) Even if accurate and dense point positions are available, densification can still im-prove NVS quality. Furthermore, for certain densification strategies, using dense initialization can actually degrade performance. (ii) Despite this, using dense initialization can improve generalization performance on views underrepresented in the training set. (iii) Two of the evaluated densification strategies [9, 21] are highly insensitive to both the accuracy and density distribution of the initial set of Gaussians. Thus, with the current densification methods, initialization based on stereo matching and monocular depth can be used in practice to improve generalization, without requiring significant additional processing time. Gener-ally, we observe that there is no densification strategy that performs best in all scenarios. (iv) Most importantly, we see little benefit in using dense initialization compared to sparse SfM point clouds. Based on our insights, two recommendations for the field emerge: (1) Practi-cal systems should prioritize robust densification strategies over highly accurate initialization, as methods that are insensitive to initialization properties can achieve competitive results even when initialized with SfM. (2) While providing additional priors from inexpensive sources such as stereo matching or monocu-lar depth estimates could improve generalization, we currently do not observe significant improvements. Thus, future work should not focus on initialization or densification in isolation. Rather, densification strategies should be tailored to initialization strategies.   

> 3We will make our evaluation protocol and all other new code and data required to replicate our results publicly available. Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 3

# 2 Related Work 

The success of the original 3DGS formulation [20] has sparked significant inter-est in expanding and improving the method, targeting key areas such as core rendering and representation improvements [27, 36, 44, 49], the reconstruction of dynamic scenes [42, 45], relighting techniques [3, 15, 26], feed-forward net-works [4,6,32], geometry consistent 3DGS and mesh reconstruction [5,16,18,50], and hybrid neural–Gaussian models [24, 30, 40]. 

Initializing 3DGS. In this work, we focus on the relation between the ini-tialization of the 3D Gaussian Splatting training process, and the densification stage employed to be able to initialize from sparse Structure-from-Motion (SfM) point clouds. 3DGS requires known camera intrinsics and extrinsics for the train-ing images. These are typically computed via SfM to obtain accurate estimates, which as a side product of the estimation process produces a sparse point cloud that can be used for initialization. Hence, intialization from SfM point clouds is the de-facto standard approach, and densification strategies are typically tuned for this type of initialization. Still, there is a range of works focusing on improv-ing the initialization, including using dense feature matching between images to obtain a dense point cloud [23], and training a NeRF model for a short time to obtain a dense estimate of the scene geometry [14]. [41] uses an MLP to predict new gaussian positions based on the input SfM data. We compare the initial-ization strategy from [23] to initialization from "ground truth" laser scans and dense point clouds obtained by merging depth maps predicted by monocular depth estimators. 

Densifying 3DGS. The original 3DGS formulation relies on heuristics for creating new Gaussians close to existing ones and for splitting existing Gaus-sians [20]. [47, 50] fix a flaw in the original logic for deciding when to densify, replacing a sum of gradients (which can cancel out) with a sum of gradient mag-nitudes. This addresses the presence of under-reconstructed blurry regions with the original 3DGS formulation. [38] use an alternative densification trigger in the form of per-pixel photometric errors distributed to the Gaussians based on their individual contributions to the final pixel color. They also propose correcting the opacity of Gaussians after cloning, using opacity regularization instead of opacity reset, and limit the number of newly added Gaussians in each densifica-tion iteration to a fraction of the current model size. Both [19, 21] improve the densification stage through encouraging scene exploration. [21] views the current 3DGS scene as a Markov Chain Monte Carlo sample, and adds random noise to each Gaussian mean μi in each optimization step. They reformulate pruning and cloning in a way that aims to preserve probabilities across state transitions. [9] drives the creation of new Gaussians based on an “Edge Aware” score, which is calculated based on edge detector response in the input images. [35] uses split-ting along the longest axis similar to [9], and prioritizes splitting Gaussians based on contributed per-pixel errors relative to the other Gaussians in each view (as opposed to [38], which does not use this relative formulation). [13] employs a depth re-initialization mechanism, which resets the scene representation by first 4 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

rendering depth images from the current 3DGS model and then replaces the set of Gaussians with a new one obtained by unprojecting random pixels in these depth maps. For our evaluation of densification strategies, we use [47] (as it represents the original densification approach of 3DGS) and [9, 21] as representatives of state-of-the-art densification strategies. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20] represents a scene as a set of N

anisotropic Gaussian primitives G = {Gi}Ni=1 , each parameterized as 

Gi = ( μi, Σi, α i , fi), (1) where μi ∈ R3 denotes the mean, Σi ∈ R3×3 is a positive semi-definite covariance matrix describing spatial extent, αi ∈ R is the opacity, and fi represents a view-dependent color function. In practice, to ensure it remains positive semi-definite throughout optimization, Σi is represented as an R3 scale vector and a rotation quaternion, and fi is encoded through a set of spherical harmonics (SH) coefficients. The final color of each pixel is obtained via front-to-back alpha compositing with a differentiable tile-based rasterizer. Training optimizes the parameters {Gi}Ni=1 using Stochastic Gradient De-scent (SGD) as to minimize a photometric loss between rendered and ground-truth images. To bootstrap the optimization, an initial set of Gaussian primitives 

Ginit is created from a point cloud provided as input. We use Gmethod init to denote the initial set of Gaussians, with the superscript indicating which method was used to obtain it. During optimization, new Gaussians are added, and redun-dant Gaussians are periodically removed, through a process called densification. The original 3DGS formulation [20] uses a heuristic mechanism called Adaptive Density Control (ADC), which is described in more detail below. 

Initialization methods. To obtain the initial set of Gaussians Ginit , 3DGS [20] and most of its many variants use the sparse point cloud obtained from Structure-from-Motion (SfM). Using this input, the means μi are initialized to point po-sitions, opacities αi to 0.1, and the 0-th SH coefficients to the points’ colors. Covariances Σi are initialized isotropically using the average distance to the four nearest neighbors of each point, and higher order SH coefficients are initially set to zero. While training with random initialization is possible, it results in reduced reconstruction quality, even with advanced densification methods [19–21]. In this work, we also utilize the EDGS initialization method proposed by Kotovenko et al . [23]. This method creates a point cloud using a dense feature matching network to identify pixel-wise correspondences and their associated confidences across image pairs from several camera clusters. Initial Gaussian means μi are then obtained through triangulation. To improve initialization ac-curacy, points are sampled from a probability distribution that combines seman-tic confidence from the pretrained matching network with probabilities based Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 5

on reprojection errors. The Gaussians’ scales are then initialized proportional to the distance to the primary camera w.r.t. which matching inside a cluster was performed. SH coefficients up to 3rd order are estimated from the available multi-view color observations. 

Densification strategies. The Adaptive Density Control (ADC) heuristics proposed in [20] solve two distinct problems – pruning existing Gaussians that no longer meaningfully contribute to the scene, and adding new Gaussians to extend scene coverage and increase representation density where needed. Pruning is performed based on the opacity value of each Gaussian, where primitives falling below a specific threshold (typically ϵ = 0 .005 ) are removed, which is assisted by resetting the opacity of all primitives to a fixed low value at several points during optimization. Additionally, Gaussians that grow excessively large in 3D space are culled to prevent artifacts. To handle the expansion of the scene, ADC treats view-space positional gradients as an indicator of how well a given Gaussian fits the scene. If the average of the view-space position gradient norms accumulated for each view since the last densification step exceeds a predefined threshold, the system triggers one of two modifications depending on the Gaussian’s scale w.r.t. the scene extent: (a) small Gaussians are cloned while maintaining their size, and (b) larger Gaussians are split into two smaller ones to improve detail in the area. While these heuristics work, they can produce blurry artifacts in the final reconstruction due to lack of densification in some areas [13, 47], which the AbsGS paper [47] identifies to be caused by the canceling out of individual components of the view-space position gradients when they are accumulated for a single training view. AbsGS resolves this by accumulating the absolute values of the x and y gradient components instead of summing them directly. Kheradmand et al . [21] avoid heuristics by framing 3DGS within the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework, and use Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics updates, which promote exploration of possible scene configurations through adding random noise to μi. The authors maintain approximate validity of MCMC state transitions by relocating Gaussians with low enough opacities to the locations of high-opacity Gaussians, which represent high-probability areas. New positions are sampled by treating the other Gaussians’ opacities as a multi-nomial probability distribution, and all the other parameters are set in a way that aims to minimize the impact of the state transition on rendering results. In each densification step, the number of Gaussians is increased by 5% using the same process as for relocation, until a user-defined scene size limit is reached. Finally, the authors employ scale and opacity regularization to encourage the use of fewer Gaussians. The third evaluated densification method is the one proposed in [9], which we will refer to as “IDHFR”. During densification, a set of splitting candidates is first selected using the corrected view-space position gradient threshold formu-lation employed by AbsGS [23]. Afterwards, at most N primitives are selected for splitting, such that |G| +N≤ Gmax (t), where |G| is the current scene size, t

is the current training step, and Gmax (t) is a dynamic scene size limit that is gradually increased until it reaches a user-defined maximum. These N primi-6 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

tives are selected via random sampling, where the probabilities are defined using “Edge Aware Scores” of the primitives. These scores are obtained by calculat-ing the edge response using the discrete Laplace operator, and evaluating each Gaussian’s mean contribution to image edges across several views per densifica-tion iteration. New primitives are positioned along the longest axis of the one selected for splitting, and their opacities are reduced. Finally, the authors em-ploy additional opacity pruning passes after opacity resets, and delay parameter updates, accumulating gradients over several steps in the later stages of training to improve generalization. 

# 4 Benchmark 

The goal of this work is to study the impact of different initialization strate-gies on the performance of the densification stage. To enable a fair comparison of different densification approaches, we evaluate all initialization and densifi-cation strategies within the same 3DGS implementation, using identical hyper-parameters whenever applicable. We set a fixed per-scene limit on the final number of Gaussians in the scene. Using a unified model size allows us to directly compare models trained with dif-ferent densification and initialization strategies, while ensuring that any changes in reconstruction quality are explained by changes in the investigated variables, rather than changes in model capacity. Limiting the model size also mimics real-world scenarios, where rendering speed and memory capacity are often con-straining factors. To establish the scene-dependent model size limit, inspired by prior work [9,21], we use the final number of Gaussians obtained with sparse SfM initialization, using ADC [20] with the absolute gradient modification proposed in AbsGS [47]. While this quantity is dependent on the scene, we will refer to it simply as Gmax for simplicity. We confirm that this choice produces limits that are sufficient to represent the evaluated scenes via an ablation experiment presented in Sec. 5.1. 

4.1 Laser Scan Point Cloud Initialization 

To investigate the limits of how much high-quality initialization can improve 3DGS performance, we evaluate on two datasets with point clouds obtained with high-precision laser scanners - ScanNet++ [48] and the multi-view stereo ETH3D dataset [39]. With the goal of analyzing the contribution of initialization size, we train with point clouds subsampled to different fractions of the maxi-mum number of Gaussians for each scene Gmax . Additionally, to provide a direct comparison against SfM initialization, we also evaluate with the laser scan point clouds subsampled to the size |G SfM init | of the SfM point clouds. For a given target size Ninit , we sample Ninit points from the laser scan point cloud with uniform probability without replacement. 4 To transform this point cloud into an initial set of Gaussians, we follow the procedure in [20], which is described in Sec. 3.    

> 4This is always possible, as all the laser scan point clouds are larger than Gmax .Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 7

4.2 Practical Initialization Strategies 

While laser scan point clouds serve as a useful baseline for high-accuracy initial-ization, access to such equipment is limited and capture with separate devices complicates data acquisition and processing. Thus, methods for producing dense initialization without using additional data are of interest. 

EDGS. We implement the EDGS initialization method [23], reusing the code publicly available at the time of writing. As confirmed by the authors, the only differences with the current preprint is the lack of higher order SH initialization and minor hyperparameter adjustments. Please note that the revised SH initial-ization does improve performance according to [23]. We employ the RoMa [11] dense feature matcher with the defaults settings from the public EDGS imple-mentation, using the indoors or outdoors RoMa weights depending on the scene. 

Monocular Depth Initialization. To provide another practical initialization baseline, we implement our own initialization method which produces a point cloud with the aid of per-image monocular depth predictions. Specifically, we use Metric3Dv2 [17] with the DINOv2-reg ViT Large backbone [8, 10, 34]. Our pipeline has the following high-level steps: (1) a monocular depth predictor is invoked for each input image; (2) the predicted depth map is aligned to the SfM point cloud using LO-RANSAC [7], this alignment is then refined via linear interpolation of the depth range, following [29]; (3) world-space points are created for a subset of the image pixels; and (4) we apply the floater removal method implemented in [29] to filter out noise in front of the cameras. In cases when the number of input images is large, we select at most 300 cameras with the K-means clustering approach used in [23]. We describe our implementation in more detail in the supplementary material. 

4.3 Densification Strategies 

At this time, we include three densification methods in our benchmark. The first is AbsGS [47], which is very similar to base ADC [20], but effectively addresses the issue of gradient collision, which prevents densification and results in blurry artifacts. We also include 3DGS-MCMC [21], which has gained popularity due to its insensitivity to initialization achieved by exploration of scene structure via stochastic perturbation of Gaussian parameters. Finally, we test the IDHFR densification strategy from a recent preprint by Deng et al . [9], as the authors report very promising results in terms of both runtime performance and final reconstruction quality. To enable comparison under a fixed model size limit, we modify AbsGS to avoid creating Gaussians once Gmax is reached. 

# 5 Experiments and Analysis 

Datasets. We evaluate our benchmark on four diverse datasets to capture a wide range of geometric and viewing conditions. We use 15 scenes from Scan-Net++ [48] and 7 scenes from ETH3D [39], both of which provide data for our 8 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

laser scan initialization evaluation. We additionally split ScanNet++ into two separate tracks in order to evaluate generalization performance – “default split”, which uses the official train/test split provided by the dataset authors, and “on-trajectory”, for which we use every 8th image from the official training set as a test view. For our practical initialization method experiments we additionally use all scenes from Mip-NeRF 360 [2] and 14 scenes from Tanks & Temples [22], as both datasets are widely used for evaluating novel view synthesis performance, and 3DGS-related approaches specifically. 

Implementation Details. At the core of our implementation we use PyTorch [1] and the gsplat [46] library for rendering. To ensure consistency in evaluation and data loading logic, 5 our implementation is invoked via NerfBaselines [25], which handles evaluation of the rendered images and reporting of runtime statis-tics. Each initialization approach is implemented as a standalone Python pro-gram that produces a proxy dataset in a NerfBaselines -compatible format. The proxy dataset references the original image and COLMAP data, but additionally includes the dense point cloud, or, in the case of EDGS, a file with the initial parameters of all the Gaussians in the scene. To accommodate the inclusion of this additional information, we used a modified version of NerfBaselines ;the customized code will be made publicly available on GitHub. For AbsGS and MCMC we use the implementations provided in gsplat . For IDHFR we re-implement the strategy. The calculations were performed using Tesla A100 GPUs with 40GB of video memory. 

Hyper-parameter changes. For MCMC densification, we use a reduced 

0.0005 opacity regularization factor on both ScanNet++ variants, as it slightly improved performance in our experiments. To enable direct comparison with AbsGS and MCMC, we do not use the adjusted μi learning rate schedule for the IDHFR strategy since it did not lead to significant improvements. For AbsGS, we use a gradient threshold of 0.0004 and do not adjust the scale threshold to keep it as close as possible to original 3DGS ADC while resolving the gradient collision issue. 

5.1 Evaluation with Laser Scan Initialization 

In our first experiment, we use highly accurate point clouds, obtained with com-mercial laser scanners for initialization. Specifically, we evaluate on the Scan-Net++ (default split), ScanNet++ (on-trajectory), and ETH3D datasets, as introduced in Sec. 5. As can be seen in Fig. 1, performance varies significantly depending on the densification strategy, and the variation is even more pro-nounced on the ETH3D dataset, which has few images per scene. However, taking a closer look at the data reveals several insights. When using AbsGS, which is largely similar to the ADC heuristics proposed in [20], dense initialization always leads to significant performance improvements,  

> 5The way a dataset’s images are downscaled can have a noticeable effect on the results. [25]

Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 9   

> (a) ScanNet++ (default split)
> (b) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)
> (c) ETH3D

Fig. 1: Results using laser scan initialization at different sizes with all tested densifi-cation strategies. Dotted lines represent results using SfM initialization. The smallest laser scan initialization size in each graph corresponds to |G SfM init |, and the 3 other ini-tialization sizes are 0.5 · Gmax , 0.75 · Gmax , and 1.0 · Gmax respectively. 

even on on-trajectory views. This is not always the case with the other two densification strategies. Furthermore, they also perform much better without dense initialization, suggesting their overall superiority. Laser scan initialization leads to much higher performance improvements on the two datasets with off-trajectory test views, as it provides a geometrically correct starting point for the optimization, which improves generalization. In contrast, on the on-trajectory version of ScanNet++, it leads to performance degradation with both IDHFR, and, especially, MCMC densification. This per-formance degradation is not caused by the increase in initialization size itself, as results with |G Laser init | = |G SfM init | exhibit the same behavior. 6 Instead, we conclude that this must be caused by characteristics specific to the laser scan point clouds.  

> 6

For IDHFR, this can be seen even on the off-trajectory variant of ScanNet++. 10 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

There are two likely mechanisms behind this effect: (1) Due to the nature of the method, SfM point clouds exhibit high point density predominantly in texture-rich regions. In contrast, the laser scan point clouds are highly uniform, thus leading to Glaser init containing many small Gaussians even in low-frequency areas of the scene, as the scale of the Gaussians is calculated based on nearest neighbor distances. See Fig. 3 for a visual comparison of the generated point clouds. Be-cause neither of the two strategies that show degraded performance are capable of merging Gaussians that are unnecessarily small, but do correctly contribute to the final image, the uniform density of the laser scan point cloud diminishes the densification strategy’s capacity to prioritize high-frequency scene regions while staying within Gmax . (2) As visualized in Fig. 3, the laser scan point clouds may lack points in some regions covered by the point clouds produced by SfM and the other initialization methods, due to the inability to capture reflective surfaces. This can affect reconstruction quality significantly, since the densifica-tion strategies struggle to create new Gaussians in completely empty regions. This is confirmed by the view synthesis results in Fig. 2, where using laser scan initialization is detrimental to the reconstruction of the area behind the glass windows. Comparing MCMC and IDHFR densification, we see that the latter is much less sensitive to the negative impact of laser scan initialization. This is likely caused by the use of the “Growth Control” mechanism, which progressively in-creases the limit on the number of primitives in the scene throughout training, starting with a low value. When using dense initialization with many points, this initially leads to aggressive pruning without densification, followed by a recuperation stage, when new Gaussians are created by the densification strat-egy. In contrast, 3DGS MCMC maintains a constant scene size limit throughout training, so few new Gaussians are added through densification, prohibiting sig-nificant changes to the scene structure. When disabling densification altogether, 7 we see, that dense initialization alone can sometimes provide performance on-par with what is achievable through densification. However, for each of the datasets, there exists at least one densifi-cation strategy that provides better performance while using SfM initialization. With that, the main remaining arguments against using densification are the potential decrease in generalization and the increase in training time, though IDHFR training speed is competitive, and choosing a lower model size limit would further speed up training. 

Resiliency to Noise in Initialization. With the aim to investigate the extent to which initialization accuracy affects rendering quality, we train with laser scan point clouds perturbed with Gaussian noise at standard deviations equal to 0.01 and 0.1 of the scene extent Sscene . Following the implementation of [20], we define Sscene as max i∈ ˆNC ∥Ci − Cmean ∥, where NC is the number of training cameras, Ci is the i-th camera’s center, and Cmean is the centroid of all camera centers. Looking at Fig. 4a, all evaluated densification methods show only minor degradation at σ = 0 .01 · Sscene , indicating a significant level of noise resiliency.  

> 7We leave pruning, as described in [20], enabled.

Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 11 

Fig. 2: Qualitative results on an off-trajectory view of the “c5439f4607” ScanNet++ scene for SfM and laser scan initialization using MCMC and IDHFR densification. 

Fig. 3: Point clouds produced by the evaluated initialization methods. While the laser scan point cloud is displayed fully in the image, it is uniformly subsampled to the target size when used for initialization. 

At σ = 0 .1 · Sscene , noise dominates over structure, and the results are more on par with random initialization. However, with IDHFR and MCMC, this effect is practically absent for on-trajectory views (Fig. 4b), showcasing the initialization invariance of these strategies. Nevertheless, using the default split (Fig. 4a), some degradation is still present, suggesting initialization plays a role in improving generalization even with these high-performing densification approaches. 

Effects of Model Size Limit. To confirm that our choice of Gmax , as described in Sec. 4 does not impede performance, we conduct an experiment where we use 75% and 125% of Gmax as our limit. The results in Fig. 5 show that changing the value does not have a significant effect with both initialization methods, and regardless of whether on-trajectory or off-trajectory views are considered.    

> (a) ScanNet++ (default split) (b) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)

Fig. 4: Results obtained using laser scan initialization with 0.5 · Gmax points for all evaluated densification strategies, under different levels of Gaussian noise with standard deviations σ expressed as fractions of the scene extent Sscene .12 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler       

> (a) SfM - ScanNet++ (standard split) (b) SfM - ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)
> (c) Laser scan - ScanNet++ (standard split) (d) Laser scan - ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)

Fig. 5: Performance comparison under varying limits on the maximum number of Gaussians using laser scan and SfM initialization. 

5.2 Performance of Practical Initialization Strategies 

In this experiment, we evaluate the performance of two initialization methods that use only the camera poses and sparse point clouds obtained from SfM, as well as the input images. This makes them highly applicable in practice, since they can be integrated into any existing 3DGS pipeline. The first, EDGS [23] is based on dense matching using RoMa [11] and creates 3D points by triangulat-ing correspondences across image pairs. We denote our implementation EDGS ∗,since it is based on the publicly available code at the time of writing, which is not fully consistent with the latest preprint. Please refer to Sec. 4.2 for details. The second method, also described in Sec. 4.2, uses monocular depth predictions, which are aligned to the input sparse SfM point cloud to produce world-space points via inverse projection. We will refer to it as “Monodepth” in this section for brevity. We evaluate these methods on the MipNerf360 and Tanks & Temples datasets, as well as on both variants of ScanNet++, where we also include results with laser scan initialization. We control for initialization size by uniformly sub-sampling all pointclouds to min {|G EDGS ∗ 

> init

|, |G MD init |, G max } Gaussians. For EDGS ∗

we additionally increase Gaussians’ scales if subsampling, since EDGS directly produces Gaussian parameters and the scales are not naturally adjusted when subsampling. Quantitative evaluation results are shown in Fig. 6, and Fig. 7 provides a visual comparison of rendering output. Comparing the performance of EDGS ∗ and Monodepth, we see that the latter generally performs better. The difference is especially significant on ScanNet++, where the scenes are exclusively indoors, which can prove challenging for dense matching. While Monodepth also produces a lot of incorrectly positioned points, the floater removal process mostly alleviates this issue for points in front of several cameras. See Fig. 3 for an example of generated Gaussian positions. EDGS ∗ is more competitive on MipNerf360 and Tanks & Temples, especially Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 13     

> (a) ScanNet++ (default split)
> (b) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)
> (c) MipNerf360
> (d) Tanks & Temples

Fig. 6: Results using EDGS ∗ and our monocular depth initialization implementation, as well as laser scan initialization, where available. EDGS ∗ is our EDGS implementation based on the public code available at the time of writing. All initializations except the SfM baselines were uniformly subsampled to the same size. 

when training without densification, which is a focus of the EDGS paper. 8 The mean processing time across all four datasets was 102.55s for EDGS ∗ and 98.68s for Monodepth, excluding dataset loading and initialization export. Focusing on the two variants of ScanNet++ (Figs. 6a and 6b), where high precision point clouds are available, we see that the “practical” initialization methods show competitive results, and can actually outperform laser scan ini-tialization, likely due to the better handling of reflective and light-absorbing surfaces. The decreased initialization precision and noise does not seem to af-fect the results significantly, which is expected, considering the noise resiliency  

> 8

Performance of Monodepth without densification could likely be improved if a higher initial opacity was used. Following [20], the evaluated version uses αinit = 0 .1, which can lead to significant pruning at the start of training. 14 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler  

> Fig. 7: Qualitative comparison on the “Garden” scene from the MipNerf360 [2] dataset using SfM, EDGS ∗, and Monodepth initialization, paired with AbsGS and IDHFR, and without densification. Using dense initialization does not provide improvements in every part of the image, but improves generalization.

discussed in Sec. 5.1. Overall, besides the base performance difference, the be-havior seen using EDGS and Monodepth is consistent with what we observed using laser scan initialization – dense initialization improves generalization per-formance, but does not significantly improve on-trajectory rendering when paired with sufficiently advanced densification. Figure 7 provides a qualitative example which supports these conclusions. 

# 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we studied the relationship between the initialization and densifi-cation stages in 3D Gaussian Splatting. We introduced a new benchmark that allowed us to systematically compare the performance of different densification strategies under different initializations of the 3D Gaussians’ positions. Detailed experiments lead to interesting insights: (1) there is no densification strategy that performs best in all scenarios. (2) While dense initialization can help improve performance, especially in terms of generalization to new viewpoints, we inter-estingly observe very little improvement compared to sparse SfM-based initial-ization on average. In particular, we observe that both the MCMC and IDHFR densification approaches are highly robust to both the density and accuracy of the initialization. We thus conclude that initialization is currently not the main bottleneck of 3DGS performance. However, we see potential in developing spe-cific densification strategies for specific initialization methods (and in particular densification schemes that include merging 3D Gaussians to remove redundan-cies and thus free up capacity). We will make our benchmark, including our evaluation code and the initial-ization data, publicly available.  

> Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Czech Science Foundation (GACR) EXPRO (project UNI-3D, grant no. 23-07973X) and the CEDMO 2.0 NPO project (Central European Digital Media Observatory). We would like to gratefully

Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 15 acknowledge access to the computational infrastructure of the OP VVV funded project CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000765 “Research Center for Informatics”. 

# References 

1. Ansel, J., Yang, E., He, H., Gimelshein, N., Jain, A., Voznesensky, M., Bao, B., Bell, P., Berard, D., Burovski, E., Chauhan, G., Chourdia, A., Constable, W., Des-maison, A., DeVito, Z., Ellison, E., Feng, W., Gong, J., Gschwind, M., Hirsh, B., Huang, S., Kalambarkar, K., Kirsch, L., Lazos, M., Lezcano, M., Liang, Y., Liang, J., Lu, Y., Luk, C., Maher, B., Pan, Y., Puhrsch, C., Reso, M., Saroufim, M., Siraichi, M.Y., Suk, H., Suo, M., Tillet, P., Wang, E., Wang, X., Wen, W., Zhang, S., Zhao, X., Zhou, K., Zou, R., Mathews, A., Chanan, G., Wu, P., Chintala, S.: PyTorch 2: Faster Machine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Trans-formation and Graph Compilation. In: 29th ACM International Conference on Ar-chitectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’24). ACM (Apr 2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366 ,

https://docs.pytorch.org/assets/pytorch2-2.pdf 

2. Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. CVPR (2022) 3. Bi, Z., Zeng, Y., Zeng, C., Pei, F., Feng, X., Zhou, K., Wu, H.: Gs3: Efficient relighting with triple gaussian splatting. In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers. pp. 1–12 (2024) 4. Charatan, D., Li, S.L., Tagliasacchi, A., Sitzmann, V.: pixelsplat: 3d gaussian splats from image pairs for scalable generalizable 3d reconstruction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 19457– 19467 (2024) 5. Chen, D., Li, H., Ye, W., Wang, Y., Xie, W., Zhai, S., Wang, N., Liu, H., Bao, H., Zhang, G.: Pgsr: Planar-based gaussian splatting for efficient and high-fidelity sur-face reconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 

31 (9), 6100–6111 (2024) 6. Chen, Y., Xu, H., Zheng, C., Zhuang, B., Pollefeys, M., Geiger, A., Cham, T.J., Cai, J.: Mvsplat: Efficient 3d gaussian splatting from sparse multi-view images. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 370–386. Springer (2024) 7. Chum, O., Matas, J., Kittler, J.: Locally optimized ransac. In: Michaelis, B., Krell, G. (eds.) Pattern Recognition. pp. 236–243. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003) 8. Darcet, T., Oquab, M., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P.: Vision transformers need reg-isters (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16588 

9. Deng, X., Diao, C., Li, M., Yu, R., Xu, D.: Improving densification in 3d gaussian splatting for high-fidelity rendering (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.12313 

10. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., Houlsby, N.: An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale (2021), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 

11. Edstedt, J., Sun, Q., Bökman, G., Wadenbäck, M., Felsberg, M.: Roma: Robust dense feature matching. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 19790–19800 (2024) 12. Fan, Z., Cong, W., Wen, K., Wang, K., Zhang, J., Ding, X., Xu, D., Ivanovic, B., Pavone, M., Pavlakos, G., et al.: Instantsplat: Sparse-view gaussian splatting in seconds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20309 (2024) 16 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 13. Fang, G., Wang, B.: Mini-splatting: Representing scenes with a constrained number of gaussians. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 165–181. Springer (2024) 14. Foroutan, Y., Rebain, D., Yi, K.M., Tagliasacchi, A.: Evaluating alternatives to sfm point cloud initialization for gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12547 (2024) 15. Gao, J., Gu, C., Lin, Y., Li, Z., Zhu, H., Cao, X., Zhang, L., Yao, Y.: Relightable 3D Gaussians: Realistic point cloud relighting with brdf decomposition and ray tracing. In: Leonardis, A., Ricci, E., Roth, S., Russakovsky, O., Sattler, T., Varol, G. (eds.) Computer Vision – ECCV 2024. pp. 73–89. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2025) 16. Guédon, A., Lepetit, V.: Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruction and high-quality mesh rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 5354–5363 (2024) 17. Hu, M., Yin, W., Zhang, C., Cai, Z., Long, X., Chen, H., Wang, K., Yu, G., Shen, C., Shen, S.: Metric3d v2: A versatile monocular geometric foundation model for zero-shot metric depth and surface normal estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 46 (12), 10579–10596 (Dec 2024). https: //doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2024.3444912 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI. 2024.3444912 

18. Huang, B., Yu, Z., Chen, A., Geiger, A., Gao, S.: 2d gaussian splatting for geo-metrically accurate radiance fields. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 conference papers. pp. 1–11 (2024) 19. Jung, J., Han, J., An, H., Kang, J., Park, S., Kim, S.: Relaxing accurate initializa-tion constraint for 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09413 (2024) 20. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 42 (4) (July 2023), https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/ 

21. Kheradmand, S., Rebain, D., Sharma, G., Sun, W., Tseng, Y.C., Isack, H., Kar, A., Tagliasacchi, A., Yi, K.M.: 3d gaussian splatting as markov chain monte carlo. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2024), spotlight Presentation 22. Knapitsch, A., Park, J., Zhou, Q.Y., Koltun, V.: Tanks and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics 36 (4) (2017) 23. Kotovenko, D., Grebenkova, O., Ommer, B.: Edgs: Eliminating densification for efficient convergence of 3dgs (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13204 

24. Kulhanek, J., Peng, S., Kukelova, Z., Pollefeys, M., Sattler, T.: WildGaussians: 3D gaussian splatting in the wild. In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2024) 25. Kulhanek, J., Sattler, T.: NerfBaselines: Consistent and reproducible evaluation of novel view synthesis methods. In: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) (2025) 26. Liang, Z., Zhang, Q., Feng, Y., Shan, Y., Jia, K.: Gs-ir: 3D Gaussian splatting for inverse rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 21644–21653 (06 2024) 27. Liang, Z., Zhang, Q., Hu, W., Feng, Y., Zhu, L., Jia, K.: Analytic-splatting: Anti-aliased 3d gaussian splatting via analytic integration (2024) 28. Lin, H., Chen, S., Liew, J.H., Chen, D.Y., Li, Z., Shi, G., Feng, J., Kang, B.: Depth anything 3: recovering the visual space from any views. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10647 (2025) Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 17 29. Liu, Y., El Hakie, A.: DepthDensifier (2025), https://github.com/OpsiClear/ DepthDensifier 

30. Lu, T., Yu, M., Xu, L., Xiangli, Y., Wang, L., Lin, D., Dai, B.: Scaffold-gs: Struc-tured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 20654–20664 (2024) 31. Ma, Y., Wei, G., Xiao, H., Cheng, Y.: Hbsplat: Robust sparse-view gaussian recon-struction with hybrid-loss guided depth and bidirectional warping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24893 (2025) 32. Mescheder, L., Dong, W., Li, S., Bai, X., Santos, M., Hu, P., Lecouat, B., Zhen, M., Delaunoy, A., Fang, T., et al.: Sharp monocular view synthesis in less than a second. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10685 (2025) 33. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: ECCV (2020) 34. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., Assran, M., Ballas, N., Galuba, W., Howes, R., Huang, P.Y., Li, S.W., Misra, I., Rabbat, M., Sharma, V., Synnaeve, G., Xu, H., Jegou, H., Mairal, J., Labatut, P., Joulin, A., Bojanowski, P.: Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision (2024), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2304.07193 

35. Pateux, S., Gendrin, M., Morin, L., Ladune, T., Jiang, X.: Bogauss: Better op-timized gaussian splatting. In: 2025 33rd European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). pp. 765–769. IEEE (2025) 36. Radl, L., Steiner, M., Parger, M., Weinrauch, A., Kerbl, B., Steinberger, M.: Stopthepop: Sorted gaussian splatting for view-consistent real-time rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 43 (4), 1–17 (2024) 37. Ranftl, R., Lasinger, K., Hafner, D., Schindler, K., Koltun, V.: Towards robust monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.01341 

38. Rota Bulò, S., Porzi, L., Kontschieder, P.: Revising densification in gaussian splat-ting. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 347–362. Springer (2024) 39. Schöps, T., Schönberger, J.L., Galliani, S., Sattler, T., Schindler, K., Pollefeys, M., Geiger, A.: A multi-view stereo benchmark with high-resolution images and multi-camera videos. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2017) 40. Tang, Z., Feng, C., Cheng, X., Yu, W., Zhang, J., Liu, Y., Long, X., Wang, W., Yuan, L.: Neuralgs: Bridging neural fields and 3d gaussian splatting for compact 3d representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23162 (2025) 41. Wang, X., Shan, L.: Gdgs: 3d gaussian splatting via geometry-guided initialization and dynamic density control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00363 (2025) 42. Wu, G., Yi, T., Fang, J., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang, X.: 4D Gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 20310–20320 (2024) 43. Xu, W., Gao, H., Shen, S., Peng, R., Jiao, J., Wang, R.: Mvpgs: Excavating multi-view priors for gaussian splatting from sparse input views. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 203–220. Springer (2024) 44. Yan, Z., Low, W.F., Chen, Y., Lee, G.H.: Multi-scale 3D Gaussian splatting for anti-aliased rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 20923–20931 (2024) 18 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 45. Yang, Z., Gao, X., Zhou, W., Jiao, S., Zhang, Y., Jin, X.: Deformable 3D Gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 20331– 20341 (2024) 46. Ye, V., Li, R., Kerr, J., Turkulainen, M., Yi, B., Pan, Z., Seiskari, O., Ye, J., Hu, J., Tancik, M., Kanazawa, A.: gsplat: An open-source library for Gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06765 (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06765 

47. Ye, Z., Li, W., Liu, S., Qiao, P., Dou, Y.: Absgs: Recovering fine details in 3d gaussian splatting. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM international conference on multimedia. pp. 1053–1061 (2024) 48. Yeshwanth, C., Liu, Y.C., Nießner, M., Dai, A.: Scannet++: A high-fidelity dataset of 3d indoor scenes. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2023) 49. Yu, Z., Chen, A., Huang, B., Sattler, T., Geiger, A.: Mip-splatting: Alias-free 3D Gaussian splatting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 19447–19456 (2024) 50. Yu, Z., Sattler, T., Geiger, A.: Gaussian opacity fields: Efficient adaptive surface reconstruction in unbounded scenes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (2024) 51. Zhou, F., Guo, W., Cao, P., Zhang, Z., Yin, J.: Initialize to generalize: A stronger initialization pipeline for sparse-view 3dgs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17479 (2025) Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 19 

# Supplementary Material 

This supplementary material provides ablation studies on all changes to hyper-parameters of the evaluated methods, and extended implementation details for our monocular depth initialization method, which was used as one of the baselines. Ad-ditionally, we provide results using initialization with the recent Depth Anything 3 method [28], which weren’t included in the paper, as the performance wasn’t promis-ing. Finally, we include additional qualitative results, and full lists of scenes that were used for evaluation on each dataset. 

# A Ablations on Hyper-Parameter Adjustments 

EDGS ∗ Scale Increase. As mentioned in the paper, we increase the scale of Gaus-sians produced by EDGS [23] when subsampling its output to fit a target initialization size. Specifically, given the original number of Gaussians produced by EDGS ∗ |G EDGS ∗ 

> init

|

and the target initialization size N , we scale the splats’ extents by 

|G EDGS ∗ 

> init

|

N . (2) As can be seen in Tab. 1, this adjustment slightly improves average metric values. 

3DGS-MCMC Opacity Regularization. For 3DGS-MCMC [21], we use a reduced opacity regularization value on both variants of ScanNet++. Initially this was moti-vated by convergence failures that occurred when a very high limit on the number of Gaussians was used erroneously. We kept the value after correcting the issue, as it provided slightly improved metric values (see Fig. 8). 

IDHFR Without Means LR Adjustment. As specified in the main text, we evaluate IDHFR [9] without the adjusted μi learning rate (LR) schedule used by the authors (specified in the appendix of [9]). This is to provide a direct comparison with the other densification strategies. As shown in Tab. 2, using the proposed adjusted LR schedule does not result in consistent improvements across all datasets, and where improvements are present, they are not very significant. 

# B Full Description of “Monodepth” Initialization 

Our monocular depth initialization pipeline begins by selecting up to 300 images for depth prediction, alignment, and inverse projection of points to world space. If there 

Table 1: Mean metric values with and without increasing scales of Gaussians when subsampling EDGS ∗ initialization. Columns where metrics are suffixed with “ ∗” repre-sent results with scale increase. Dataset PSNR PSNR ∗ ↑ SSIM SSIM ∗ ↑ LPIPS LPIPS ∗ ↓

ScanNet++ (default split) 21.908 22.006 0.858 0.859 0.263 0.262 

ScanNet++ (on-trajectory) 32.759 32.767 0.948 0.948 0.096 0.096 Tanks & Temples 23.193 23.240 0.831 0.833 0.146 0.144 

MipNerf360 27.469 27.494 0.822 0.823 0.131 0.131 20 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler   

> (a) ScanNet++ (default split)
> (b) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)

Fig. 8: Ablation on the use of adjusted opacity regularization for the MCMC densifi-cation strategy on ScanNet++ (default split) and ScanNet++ (on-trajectory). 

Table 2: Mean metric values achieved by IDHFR with and without the adjusted μi LR schedule. Columns where metrics are suffixed with “ ∗” represent results with adjusted LR schedule. Dataset PSNR PSNR ∗ ↑ SSIM SSIM ∗ ↑ LPIPS LPIPS ∗ ↓

ScanNet++ (default split) 23.064 22.981 0.876 0.876 0.234 0.233 

ScanNet++ (on-trajectory) 33.822 33.793 0.953 0.953 0.093 0.093 MipNerf360 27.689 27.841 0.822 0.832 0.135 0.132 

Tanks & Temples 23.641 23.763 0.840 0.843 0.138 0.134 

ETH3D 22.604 22.201 0.814 0.811 0.271 0.279 are less than 300 images, all images are used, otherwise, we select 300 cameras using K-Means clustering of their R4×4 extrinsic calibration matrices. This simple approach follows the current (at the time of writing) public code release for EDGS [23], and works quite well in practice. After this, the following steps are performed for each input image independently: 1. The depth predictor is invoked. In this case we use Metric3D V2 [17], with the DINOv2-reg ViT Large backbone [8, 10, 34]. 2. The predicted depth map is then aligned to the SfM point cloud using LO-RANSAC [7]. For a given set of sample SfM points that lie in the image, scale and shift that minimize error in the least squares sense are estimated using a closed form solu-tion [37]. We use 4 samples per iteration, a confidence threshold of 0.999, an inlier threshold of 0.01, and limit the algorithm to at most 2500 iterations. 3. While this coarse alignment serves as a good estimate in most cases, we observed that estimating scale and shift for the whole image is not enough, as the rela-tive alignment of the monocular depth prediction w.r.t. the SfM depths may vary across different objects and depth levels in the image. To this end, we employ a post-alignment approach, used by Yehe Liu and Aly El Hakie in their open Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 21 source monocular depth initialization implementation [29]. Given a list of SfM point depths d∗ 

> i

and a list of predicted depths di at corresponding pixels, this method computes corrected depth values for all predicted depths in the image. For each input depth di (not just those with known d∗ 

> i

), a new depth value ˆdi is calcu-lated by first finding the indices k, k + 1 of depth measurements with known SfM counterparts, such that dk ≤ di < d k+1 , and then performing linear interpolation of the corresponding SfM depth values: 

ti = di − dk

dk+1 − dk

, (3) 

ˆdi = d∗ 

> k

+ ti (d∗ 

> k+1

− d∗ 

> k

) . (4) This approach relies on the assumption that, when sorted, both the (unknown) ground truth depth values, and the predicted depth values change linearly inside the intervals between known di and d∗ 

> i

. While this assumption is not strictly true in practice, this provides a good approximation, especially in cases when the num-ber of SfM points in the image is large. Of course, incorrect alignment can occur in practice, especially for images with few known SfM depths, or when the depth predictor’s output produces different depths for objects located at the same dis-tance from the camera. But overall, this method is upon image-global alignment. An improved approach would utilize the available information about the spatial distribution of pixels with known di and d∗ 

> i

.4. To select which image points should be used to create world-space points, we use adaptive sampling of the image based on the depth values. The idea is to skew the output point distribution in a way that compensates for the effects of perspective projection and the camera trajectory characteristics of typical outside-in captures, both of which would result in much higher point density close to the cameras, if uniform subsampling was to be used. To perform the depth-guided subsampling, the depth map is transformed into a per-pixel map of target subsample factors from the range [Dmin , D max ] using linear interpolation driven by the depth values normalized to [0 , 1] range. In our experiments we use Dmin = 5 and Dmax = 15 .Additionally, to provide robustness to outliers, the depth map values are clamped to the range [Q1 − 1.5 IQR , Q 3 + 1 .5 IQR] , where IQR denotes the inter-quartile range. After subsample factors Si,j are calculated for each pixel, the final pixel mask used to select pixels for inverse projection is calculated as follows: 

Mi,j =

(

1 if (i mod ⌊Si,j ⌋ = 0) ∧ (j mod ⌊Si,j ⌋ = 0) ,

0 otherwise . (5) An example of the produced mask can be seen in Figure 9. 5. We additionally mask out pixels where the depth gradient (approximated via finite differences) is above a certain threshold to reduce noise from unprojecting points at object boundaries. 6. World-space points are created for the selected image points using inverse projec-tion with the known camera parameters. Finally, we apply a version of the floater removal method implemented in [29] to filter out noise in front of the cameras. This method works by iterating over all input cameras and counting the number of floater votes for each point. A camera votes for a point to be considered a floater, if the point is significantly in front of the predicted depth map for that camera (post alignment). In the original implementation, points for which at 22 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler least Tfloater cameras voted are removed, we use an adjusted formulation based on the ratio between floater and non-floater votes for each point. 

RGB Predicted Depth Subsampling Mask 

Fig. 9: Example of an adaptive subsampling mask constructed based on depth values. Selected pixels in the subsampling mask are visualized as squares spanning multiple pixels for better visibility. 

# C Initialization with Depth Anything 3 

In addition to the initialization methods included in the paper, we also performed eval-uation with Depth Anything 3 [28]. The “DA3-GIANT-1.1” version of the model was used, and at most 300 images were selected per scene using the same method as for EDGS ∗ and Monodepth initialization. Intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters were provided as input to the model, and only points with confidences above the 5th per-centile were included in the output. The quantitative evaluation results are presented in Fig. 10, and qualitative comparisons with other initialization methods using MCMC and IDHFR densification are included in Figs. 13 and 14. Please note, that some Scan-Net++ scenes are excluded from the averages due to fatal exceptions that occured when running Depth Anything 3 with externally provided camera extrinsic parame-ters – specifically, “c5439f4607” for the default split, and “f3d64c30f8”, “5eb31827b7”, “bde1e479ad” for on-trajectory training. The average runtime of Depth Anything 3 initialization was 45.16s, excluding dataset loading and initialization export. We did not include these results in the main evaluation as the performance was significantly below that of the other initialization strategies. This is because, on many scenes, DA3 produced significant noise and subpar alignment between the predicted depth maps. An example of this is illustrated in Fig. 11. While point cloud quality was significantly better when a higher confidence threshold was used, that also resulted in significantly reduced coverage of the scene. It should be noted that initialization with Depth Anything 3 could likely be improved by applying the alignment and filtering techniques used in our Monodepth initialization, but that would raise the initialization runtime, defying the main advantage of the method. 

# D Additional Qualitative Results 

In Fig. 12 we compare the final rendering results on test set images achieved with the benchmarked densification methods using standard SfM initialization. AbsGS provides Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 23     

> (a) ScanNet++ (default split)
> (b) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory)
> (c) MipNerf360
> (d) Tanks & Temples

Fig. 10: Comparison of Depth Anything 3 (DA3) performance with the results already included in the paper. Please note that, as mentioned in Sec. C, some scenes for Scan-Net++ (default split) and ScanNet++ (on-trajectory) are not included due to errors when running DA3. DA3 is subsampled to same size as the other initializations (same as in the paper). results inferior to the other two strategies in pretty much all cases. MCMC provides good all-round results, and shows impressive performance even on the ETH3D scenes, where the number of images is very low (under 20). However, it can sometimes struggle to recover fine details. IDHFR, on the other hand, can often show improved texture recovery, especially in background regions, but produces increased artifacts and floaters in off-trajectory and under-constrained scenarios. In Figures 13 and 14, we provide additional qualitative results achieved using ID-HFR and MCMC densification and various initialization strategies. The differences are mostly minor, with the initialization strategies trading blows in terms of background region recovery. The only exception is initialization with Depth Anything 3, where sig-nificant noise is introduced on the “Stump” scene. This is due to the aforementioned alignment and noise issues. The point clouds produced by Monodepth and Depth Any-thing 3 for this scene can be seen in Fig. 11. 24 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

Fig. 11: Initialization point clouds produced by Depth Anything 3 and our Monodepth implementation on the “Stump” scene from the MipNerf360 dataset. Please note dif-ferent point primitive sizes are used for visualization to improve visibility, as the initial DA3 point cloud contains a lot more points. 

# E Lists of Scenes Per Dataset 

In this section we provide the exact list of scenes used for evaluation with each dataset. On MipNerf360 , all scenes are used, including the “Flowers” and “Treehill” scenes. 

ScanNet++: c5439f4607, bcd2436daf, b0a08200c9, 6115eddb86, f3d64c30f8, 3f15a9266d, 5eb31827b7, 3db0a1c8f3, 40aec5fffa, 9071e139d9, e7af285f7d, bde1e479ad, 5748ce6f01, 825d228aec, 7831862f02. 

Tanks & Temples: auditorium, ballroom, palace, temple, family, horse, lighthouse, m60, train, barn, caterpillar, church, meetingroom, truck. 

ETH3D: pipes, kicker, terrace, relief, relief_2, terrains, office. Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 25 

Fig. 12: Qualitative results using SfM initialization with AbsGS, MCMC, and IDHFR densification. The depicted scenes are (top to bottom): (1) ScanNet++ (default split) - “bde1e479ad”, (2) ScanNet++ (default split) - “bcd2436daf”, (3) ScanNet++ (on-trajectory) - “3f15a9266d”, (4) ETH3D - “Pipes”, (5) ETH3D - “Terrace”, (6) Tanks & Temples - “Train”, (7) Tanks & Temples - “Family”, (8) MipNerf360 - “Stump”. 26 I. Desiatov, T. Sattler 

Fig. 13: Qualitative results using IDHFR densification and the practical initialization methods evaluated in the paper, as well as Depth Anything 3. The depicted scenes are (in columns): (1) MipNerf360 - “Stump”, (2) MipNerf360 - “Treehill”, (3) ScanNet++ (default split) - “bcd2436daf”, (4) Tanks & Temples - “Family”. Initialization and Densification in 3DGS 27 

Fig. 14: Qualitative results using MCMC densification and the practical initialization methods evaluated in the paper, as well as Depth Anything 3. The depicted scenes are (in columns): (1) MipNerf360 - “Stump”, (2) MipNerf360 - “Treehill”, (3) ScanNet++ (default split) - “bcd2436daf”, (4) Tanks & Temples - “Family”.