Title: FunFact: Building Probabilistic Functional 3D Scene Graphs via Factor-Graph Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03696v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:42:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# FunFact: Building Probabilistic Functional 3D Scene Graphs via Factor-Graph Reasoning 

## Zhengyu Fu 1 Ren´ e Zurbr¨ ugg 1 Kaixian Qu 1 Marc Pollefeys 1,2

## Marco Hutter 1 Hermann Blum 3† Zuria Bauer 1†

> 1

## ETH Z¨ urich 2Microsoft 3University of Bonn & Lamarr Institute 

> †

Equal supervision 

## Abstract 

Recent work in 3D scene understanding is moving beyond purely spatial analysis toward functional scene understand-ing. However, existing methods often consider functional relationships between object pairs in isolation, failing to capture the scene-wide interdependence that humans use to resolve ambiguity. We introduce FunFact, a frame-work for constructing probabilistic open-vocabulary func-tional 3D scene graphs from posed RGB-D images. Fun-Fact first builds an object- and part-centric 3D map and uses foundation models to propose semantically plausi-ble functional relations. These candidates are converted into factor graph variables and constrained by both LLM-derived common-sense priors and geometric priors. This formulation enables joint probabilistic inference over all functional edges and their marginals, yielding substan-tially better calibrated confidence scores. To benchmark this setting, we introduce FunThor, a synthetic dataset based on AI2-THOR with part-level geometry and rule-based functional annotations. Experiments on Scene-Fun3D, FunGraph3D, and FunThor show that FunFact im-proves node and relation discovery recall and significantly reduces calibration error for ambiguous relations, high-lighting the benefits of holistic probabilistic modeling for functional scene understanding. See our project page at 

https://funfact-scenegraph.github.io/ .

## 1. Introduction 

Understanding 3D environments through their functional 

relationships, rather than only geometry or semantics, is increasingly recognized as a key frontier in computer vi-sion [8, 37, 46]. Functional scene understanding seeks to capture how entities interact: which elements control oth-ers, which parts afford action, and how one can interact within the scene. Such information is crucial for virtual training systems [23, 31], AR assistive systems providing actionable guidance [25], and robots that must reason about Remote TV Switch Floor Lamp Ceiling Light Control (0.99) Toggle (0.58) Toggle (0.74)     

> Cardinality Factor Proximity Factor x1x2x3xiVariable
> Input: RGB + Depth Factor Graph Construction & Probabilistic Inference Functional 3D Scene Graph

Figure 1. FunFact for functional scene understanding. Given posed RGB-D inputs, FunFact reconstructs an object- and part-centric 3D map and builds a functional scene graph (top). Candi-date relations (e.g., remote controls TV , switch toggles lamp ) are encoded as binary variables in a dual factor graph (bottom), where cardinality and proximity factors jointly resolve ambiguities via belief propagation, yielding calibrated per-edge confidence scores. 

acting in everyday environments [16, 17, 34, 44], deciding 

what is present and how it can be used. At its core, functionality can be viewed as a set of re-lations between entities in the scene. For example, we may want to know which light switch turns on which lamp, which knob controls which burner, or which cable must be unplugged to power down the electric kettle. However, many of these relations are not fully observable from vi-sion alone: the light and its switch may be far apart or occluded, and the causal effect of toggling the switch is not directly encoded in static appearance. This inherent gap between visual evidence and functional behavior makes 

> arXiv:2604.03696v1 [cs.CV] 4 Apr 2026

functional scene understanding particularly challenging. It calls for models that can combine geometric and semantic cues with structured priors and external knowledge to in-fer plausible functional relationships under ambiguity. Be-cause functionality remains ambiguous from static obser-vations, we argue that prior models should not just predict the most likely connections, but also model the distribu-tion over all likely options. To this end, we propose Fun-Fact , which predicts calibrated per-functional-edge confi-dence scores holistically via factor graph optimization. Like prior work [37, 46], we use foundation models as seman-tic priors to construct open-vocabulary functional 3D scene graphs from posed RGB-D images. By jointly modeling functional relationships and their uncertainties, however, 

FunFact captures scene interdependencies that independent pairwise reasoning misses. We validate our method through extensive experi-ments on both real-world datasets (SceneFun3D [8], Fun-Graph3D [46]) and a newly annotated synthetic dataset 

FunThor collected from AI2-THOR [23] scenes. The re-sults demonstrate significant improvements in node and relation discovery recall compared to strong baselines, along with substantially lower expected calibration error (ECE) [13] in confidence estimation, highlighting Fun-Fact ’s advantages of holistic probabilistic modeling for functional scene understanding. In summary, our main con-tributions are: • A novel and robust pipeline for reconstructing open-vocabulary functional 3D scene graphs from posed RGB-D inputs. • A new synthetic dataset ( FunThor ) for benchmarking functional scene understanding with part-level geometry and dense functional annotations. • A factor-graph formulation that combines LLM priors with geometric evidence to jointly infer functional rela-tions and produce better-calibrated confidence estimates. 

## 2. Related Work 

3D Semantic Representations. Recent methods lever-age foundation models [1, 6, 21] to produce open-vocabulary scene representations without task-specific re-training. OpenScene [30] fuses multi-view 2D CLIP-aligned [33] features with distilled 3D point features for zero-shot semantic retrieval, while ConceptFusion [18] ex-tends this to multimodal queries including text, clicks, im-ages, and audio. Shifting toward object-centric views, OpenMask3D [38] aggregates 3D instance mask features across views. Other approaches, such as Tag Map [47], build large-vocabulary semantic maps by combining large-scale image tagging [48] with coarse space carving [24]. Our pipeline builds on these ideas, using similar semantic grounding to identify object and part candidates before rea-soning about higher-level functional structure. 

3D Scene Graphs. 3D scene graphs (3DSGs) represent en-vironments as structured graphs of entities and their rela-tionships. Early works [4, 20] unified geometry, seman-tics, and spatial hierarchy within 3DSGs for static scenes. Subsequent methods support incremental construction from RGB [42], RGB-D [41], or RGB+LiDAR sequences [36], enabling online construction and dynamic updates. Lever-aging foundation models, ConceptGraphs [12] and HOV-SG [40] integrate open-vocabulary semantics into scene graphs, demonstrating applicability to language-prompted navigation. Owing to their structural compactness and rich semantics, 3DSGs increasingly serve as a bridge be-tween scene understanding and high-level task planning [2, 5, 28, 35, 43], with broad adoption in embodied intelli-gence [11, 14, 15, 39, 45]. However, these methods address semantic and spatial reasoning exclusively, leaving func-tional interactions unmodeled. 

Functional Scene Understanding. This area moves be-yond “what” and “where” to capture “how” objects inter-relate. IFR-Explore [32] learns inter-object functional rela-tions in synthetic environments but only predicts whether a relation exists, without specifying its type. As it re-lies on ground-truth 3D data for inference, its real-world applicability is limited. To support functional under-standing in real scenes, several benchmarks and methods have emerged. SceneFun3D [8] provides fine-grained an-notations for functionality and affordances of interactive parts. OpenFunGraph [46] and FunGraph [37] propose open-vocabulary functional 3D scene graphs that model object-part and object-object interactions using LLMs and 2D vision-language models. Other works [10] explore interaction-driven scene graphs and affordance detection for a distinct set of objects (“lamp”, “switch”, “handle”). Our work builds on this direction but introduces a key advancement: a factor graph framework that jointly rea-sons over all functional edges by integrating LLM-derived priors and geometric cues. This enables holistic inference with better-calibrated edge confidence predictions, which is critical for informed planning and decision-making in real-world deployments. 

## 3. Method 

To infer geometric and functional structure from poten-tially ambiguous and incomplete visual evidence, we design a unified pipeline that combines object- and part-centric scene reconstruction with a probabilistic factor-graph for-mulation for functional reasoning. Our method grounds open-vocabulary object and part proposals from founda-tion models into a consistent 3D representation, forming the structural backbone for downstream inference. We then translate semantically plausible functional hypotheses into candidate relations and jointly reason over them through a dual factor graph. An overview is shown in Fig. 2. 1) Scene Reconstruction   

> 2) Functional Scene-Graph Creation
> Object-
> Object
> Proposals
> Object-Part
> Proposals
> Instance Segmentation
> Consistency
> Filtering &
> Association
> Functional Scene Graph
> Multi-View 3D Fusion
> Dual Factor Graph
> Object
> Names
> Posterior Functional Graph
> Grounding DINO
> Bounding
> Boxes
> Depth & Pose
> Belief
> Propagation Dualization
> Part Segmentation
> SAM Grounding DINO
> Proximity
> Prior
> Proximity
> Prior
> Proximity
> Prior
> RGB Image
> switch
> light
> toggle ( 0.25 )
> button
> activate ( 0.95 )
> light
> toggle ( 0.65 )
> Part
> Names
> Object-centric crop
> Cardinality
> Prior
> switch
> light
> toggle
> button
> activate
> light
> toggle
> Filtering
> &
> Lifting
> Instance
> Association &
> Merging
> Scene Understanding
> Objects:
> {
> "name": "oven",
> "functional_parts": [
> "control knob",
> "handle"
> ],
> "bounding_box": [ 0.4, 0.2, 0.6, 0.4 ]
> },..
> SAM
> SAM

Figure 2. Overview of FunFact : Given Posed RGB-D images FunFact generates scene reconstructions and functional 3D scene graphs in two stages: i) Scene Reconstruction. Given a set of RGB-D images and respective poses, we extract bounding boxes, scene descrip-tion, object list, and candidate part names using GPT-4.1 . These textual cues are used to obtain open-vocabulary object detections with GroundingDINO, which are filtered for consistency and turned into region proposals and SAM-based instance masks. A second Ground-ingDINO + SAM branch segments functional parts conditioned on the predicted object and part names. Finally, we lift all object and part instances to 3D and fuse them across views yielding a coherent, part-aware 3D reconstruction that forms the basis for the subsequent functional scene graph inference. ii) Functional Scene-Graph Creation. Given the semantic 3D reconstruction and the part / object nodes, 

GPT-4.1 proposes object–object and object–part relations to form an initial functional scene graph. We convert this graph into a dual factor graph with different priors and perform belief propagation to obtain calibrated edge probabilities. This yields the posterior functional scene graph grounded in the reconstructed scene. 

3.1. Scene Reconstruction 

Given posed RGB-D observations, FunFact first builds an explicit 3D object- and part-centric representation, which then serves as the backbone for our functional scene graph. 

VLM-based object and part proposals. We begin by querying a large vision-language model (VLM) with the current RGB image 1. The VLM is prompted to detect func-tional objects (e.g., coffee machine, cabinet, trash can ) and, for each object, output a hierarchical semantic label cover-ing both the object and its functional parts (e.g., button, han-dle, pedal ), a concise object-level description, and a coarse 2D bounding box in normalized xyxy format (with coor-dinates scaled to [0, 1] relative to image dimensions). This step identifies salient functional components and provides semantic and spatial cues for detection. 

Object detection and hallucination filtering. VLMs can hallucinate non-existent or implausible parts. Furthermore, their predicted bounding boxes tend to be spatially noisy. To robustly ground the proposed objects, we run Ground-ingDINO [27] on the original image using the VLM-proposed object labels as queries. We then cross-check the detections with the coarse VLM bounding boxes, forming 

> 1

We employ gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 .

an ensemble of models: proposals that are not detected by GroundingDINO or that strongly disagree with the VLM’s coarse bounding boxes are discarded. This filtering step suppresses hallucinated objects and associates VLM pro-posals with their grounded detections. 

Part-centric detection within object crops. For each val-idated object, we expand its fine bounding box predicted by GroundingDINO, crop the image around the box, and run GroundingDINO again using the VLM-proposed part names of this object as textual queries (e.g., handle , but-ton ). Cropping focuses the detector on a smaller region, ef-fectively increasing the relative resolution of the object and its parts, which improves the detector’s ability to localize small, fine-grained functional components. 

Part filtering and consistency checks. The raw part detec-tions are further refined by geometric and structural filter-ing. We discard parts whose bounding boxes are too large or too small relative to their parent object, as well as parts that have insufficient overlap with the parent object’s bounding box. This ensures that retained parts are spatially consistent with their parent objects and removes spurious detections on background or unrelated surfaces. Details for our filter-ing approach are provided in the Appendix (Sec. A). Stove             

> Burner 1
> Burner 2
> Knob 1
> Knob 2 Figure 3. Functional Scene Graph and its Dual Factor Graph.
> Left: Candidate functional scene graph with edges e1, . . . , e 4rep-resenting knob–burner relations. Right: The dual factor graph, where each binary variable xiis the dual of edge ei, encoding whether that relation is present. pi: unary proximity prior on
> xi;Ki: cardinality factor enforcing one-to-one association per knob; Bi: cardinality factor enforcing one-to-one association per burner.

Multi-view fusion and object–parts graph construction. 

Following BBQ [26], we back-project all validated object and part detections into 3D and fuse them across views to obtain consolidated object- and part-level point clouds. Ob-jects that are consistently observed to overlap across mul-tiple views are merged into a single 3D instance; in such cases, the parts associated with the individual objects are inherited by the merged object. The resulting representa-tion is an object- and part-centric 3D map together with an explicit graph that encodes object–parts relations. 

3.2. Functional Scene-Graph Creation 

Given the object- and part-centric 3D map, FunFact con-structs candidate functional relations between nodes (e.g., 

knob –burner , handle –door ) and encodes them as binary variables constrained by prior factors in a dual functional factor graph, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The “dual” nature of this graph stems from an inversion of the original scene graph structure: nodes from the scene graph become edge constraints (factors) in the factor graph, while scene graph edges (the candidate relations) become the variables. 

LLM-based functional relation priors. For every object with functional parts, we query an LLM with the object’s label, description, and the labels of all its parts (e.g., knob ,

burner , door handle ), asking it to propose plausible seman-tic functional relations among them (e.g., knob controls burner , handle opens door ). For each proposed relation type, the LLM also predicts whether it is typically one-to-one (e.g., each burner has a dedicated knob) or follows a more flexible cardinality pattern (e.g., a control panel with many buttons for one device). For a scene with N objects, we represent the full set of proposed relation templates as 

T = {T k}Nk=1 , where Tk = {rk,j }Mk 

> j=1

is the set of Mk

relation templates proposed for the k-th object. 

Dual factor graph construction. For each relation tem-plate rk,j , we enumerate all part–object and part–part com-binations that match the semantic types of the template (e.g., all pairs of stove knob and stove burner on a stove) and connect them with candidate functional edges. Let 

Ek,j = {ek,j i }Ek,j  

> i=1

denote the set of candidate edges instanti-ated for rk,j , where Ek,j is the total number of edges result-ing from this exhaustive match. From these edges, we con-struct a local factor graph with variables Xk,j = {xk,j i }Ek,j  

> i=1

.Each binary variable xk,j i ∈ { 0, 1} is the dual of edge ek,j i ,indicating whether that functional edge is present. This con-struction yields a densely connected local functional group (e.g., a complete bipartite graph between all knobs and burners on a stove), which we subsequently disambiguate through probabilistic inference. Cardinality-based constraint factors. To encode structural priors such as one-to-one or one-to-many mappings, we introduce cardinality factors ϕcard (·) over variables within each local group. For one-to-one relations, these factors pe-nalize configurations where a single part connects to multi-ple counterparts (e.g., one knob controlling several burners, or one burner controlled by several knobs) or where a part is not connected to any counterpart. Concretely, for a part node n (e.g., a specific knob) involved in one-to-one rela-tions, let Xn denote the variables whose dual edges are in-cident to n, and let dn = P 

> x∈X n

x be the number of active connections. We define the cardinality factor as: 

ϕcard (Xn) = 

(

bdn−1 if dn ≥ 1,b2 if dn = 0 ,

where b ∈ (0 , 1) is a hyperparameter controlling the strength of the penalty. Intuitively, this factor imposes soft constraints on the number of active edges incident to the node, making configurations with too many connections (or zero connections) less likely under the model, thereby fa-voring structurally plausible assignments. Proximity-based prior factors. Finally, for each variable 

xk,j i , we assign a prior belief based on the length of its dual edge ek,j i (i.e., the Euclidean distance between the nodes it connects). We encode these beliefs as unary proximity fac-tors: 

ϕprox (xk,j i ) = e− d(ek,j i ) 

> λk,j

, (1) where d(ek,j i ) is the length of the edge ek,j i and λk,j is a scaling parameter defined as the median length of all edges in the local candidate edge set Ek,j . This formulation biases the graph toward selecting the closer connection while still allowing the factor graph to correct mistakes using the car-dinality constraints. The result is a set of local functional factor graphs where each candidate relation is represented as a binary variable, regularized by both proximity priors and structured cardinality constraints, ready for holistic in-ference in the global FunFact model. Object–Object functional proposal. Analogous to the part–object and part–part proposals in the previous section, we use the LLM to suggest plausible inter-object functional relations (e.g., sponge cleans countertop , knife can cut ap-ple ), along with their typical cardinality patterns. But for object-object relations, we do not enforce the proximity prior by default, and instead instruct the LLM to suggest which relations require proximity (e.g., curtains cover win-dows). We then instantiate local factor graphs over all edges that are either “one-to-one” or require proximity, or both, equip them with the same cardinality-based constraint fac-tors and proximity prior factors, and jointly optimize these object–object edges together with the part-centric relations in the global FunFact model. 

Probabilistic inference via belief propagation. We im-plement the dual functional factor graph using pgmpy [3] and perform belief propagation to infer the joint distribu-tion over all candidate functional edges. To accelerate infer-ence, we identify disjoint connected components, denoted as Cm(m = 1 , 2, ..., M ), which are isolated subgraphs that do not share prior or constraint factors (e.g., knowing a knob controls a burner does not help disambiguate con-nections between remote controls and TVs), and run in-ference on each component separately. For a given com-ponent Cm with variable set Xm, the joint distribution is 

P (Xm) = 1

> Zm

Q 

> x∈X m

ϕprox (x) Q  

> f∈F m

ϕcard (∂f ), where 

Fm denotes the cardinality factors in Cm, ∂f ⊆ X m the variables connected to factor f , and Zm a normalization constant. After convergence, we marginalize this distribu-tion to obtain per-edge confidence scores, which are thresh-olded to produce the final functional scene graph. 

## 4. Results 

We evaluate our FunFact across both real-world datasets and our newly introduced FunThor benchmark to assess its effectiveness in reconstructing functional scene graphs and predicting functional relations with better-calibrated confi-dence estimates. The experiments evaluate mapping perfor-mance, functional edge quality, and confidence calibration, with comparisons to state-of-the-art baselines. Fig. 5 shows qualitative results of FunFact . Our pipeline detects fine-grained functional parts (e.g., the keyboard and touchpad of a laptop) and predicts both intra-object relations (e.g., key-board inputs commands to laptop) and inter-object relations (e.g., light switch turns on/off ceiling light). 

4.1. Functional AI2-THOR ( FunThor )

Existing datasets for functional scene understanding, such as SceneFun3D [8] and FunGraph3D [46], have been in-strumental in driving progress, but remain limited in scope. SceneFun3D primarily focuses on part-level affordances (e.g., knobs, handles), with limited coverage of inter-object relations, while FunGraph3D extends to inter-object func-Kitchen   

> Bathroom
> Figure 4. Examples of two of our newly annotated AI2-THOR environments. For two scenes (bathroom, top; kitchen, bottom) we show a top-down view with mapped functional objects (left) and the corresponding instance-, part-segmentation and functional edges (right), illustrating our functional annotations.

tionality but suffers from sparse and partially heuristic an-notations. As a result, these datasets provide incomplete coverage of functionally important entities and relations, limiting fair evaluation of precision and calibration. To address these limitations, we introduce Functional AI2-THOR (FunThor) , a new synthetic benchmark built on top of the AI2-THOR [23] scenes. FunThor contains 12 scenes spanning 4 environment types (i.e., kitchen, liv-ing room, bedroom, and bathroom; three each), with part-level geometry and 26 types of functional relations inher-ently supported by the simulator. Each scene includes 60 uniformly sampled, posed RGB-D frames and complete ground-truth annotations for nodes and functional relations, spanning a total of 720 images. All functional annota-tions are automatically generated based on object proper-ties and affordances natively supported in AI2-THOR, en-suring comprehensive coverage of all functionally relevant entities and relations in each scene. Fig. 4 shows example scenes and their annotations from FunThor . Further details are provided in the Supplementary material. 

4.2. Mapping Performance 

We evaluate mapping quality on SceneFun3D and Fun-Graph3D following the Recall@K protocol introduced in OpenFunGraph [46]. For each ground-truth node, we loop over all predicted nodes and find the first one with a non-zero 3D bounding box IoU. We then compute the CLIP-based [33] cosine similarities between the predicted textual label and all labels in the dataset, and treat the prediction as a match if the ground-truth label ranks among the top-K most similar labels (K=3, 10). Table 1. Scene Reconstruction Comparison. We report Recall@K ( R@3 /R@10 ; higher is better) for three node categories— Objects ,                                                                                          

> Interactive Elements , and Overall Nodes —on SceneFun3D and FunGraph3D . Bold numbers mark the best result per column. Compared to Open3DSG [22], ConceptGraph [12], ConceptGraph variant, and OpenFunGraph [46], FunFact attains the highest recall across nearly all categories and both datasets, indicating more reliable recovery of functional entities and relations.
> Methods SceneFun3D FunGraph3D
> Objects (↑)Inter. Elements (↑)Overall Nodes (↑)Objects (↑)Inter. Elements (↑)Overall Nodes (↑)
> R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 Open3DSG 61.2 70.7 54.4 61.8 56.7 64.7 50.9 58.1 21.8 33.9 33.4 43.6 ConceptGraph 71.3 77.1 6.6 8.6 28.3 31.4 58.0 66.3 2.5 4.1 20.1 25.2 ConceptGraph + IED 71.3 77.1 53.1 59.5 60.1 66.0 58.0 66.3 20.5 33.4 38.9 45.0 OpenFunGraph 81.8 87.8 71.0 79.5 73.0 82.8 70.7 79.1 44.4 57.6 55.5 65.8 FunFact (Ours) 90.5 93.3 64.6 78.8 73.2 83.6 91.1 96.6 68.3 78.7 77.9 86.2

As shown in Tab. 1, FunFact achieves consistently higher recall across object, and overall node categories compared to all baselines. On SceneFun3D, our model maintains competitive recall despite annotation biases that label visually distinct interactive elements (e.g., “pedal” or “drain”) under generic classes such as “handle” or “knob”, as shown in the Appendix. This coarse labeling lowers open-vocabulary alignment scores, and the larger perfor-mance gap between K=3 and K=10 further highlights this issue, as our fine-grained predictions are incorrectly penal-ized when matched against these generic annotations. On FunGraph3D, where annotations are more specific, 

FunFact outperforms OpenFunGraph by significant mar-gins in both Recall@3 and Recall@10, particularly for small interactive elements. This improvement stems from our hierarchical object-part mapping pipeline, which en-ables robust detection and fusion of fine-grained compo-nents often missed by flat object-centric baselines. 

4.3. Functional Relationships 

Following the evaluation protocol of OpenFunGraph, we assess functional relation prediction using the Recall@K metric on SceneFun3D, FunGraph3D, and our newly pro-posed FunThor dataset. A functional relation is repre-sented as a triplet (subject, interaction, object), and a pre-dicted triplet is considered correct only if both its nodes and interaction label match the ground truth. For node-level matching, the predicted subject and object must each match the ground-truth entities spatially and semantically, as described in Sec. 4.2. The interaction label is evaluated only when both node matches are confirmed: we compute BERT [9] similarities between the predicted relation label and all ground-truth relation labels of the dataset, and the prediction is correct if the ground-truth label ranks within the top K. We report Recall@K for K=5 and 10 on Scene-Fun3D and FunGraph3D, and K=3 and 5 on FunThor fol-lowing its denser annotation protocol. Tab. 2 summarizes our results. We report three met-rics: node association recall (i.e., subject-object pairs with-out considering the interaction label), full triplet recall (i.e., subject, interaction, object), and edge prediction recall (i.e., the rate of matched triplets among all predictions with correct subject-object pairs). On FunGraph3D, FunFact 

substantially outperforms OpenFunGraph across all met-rics except edge prediction R@10. This slight drop is ex-pected: FunFact detects significantly more functional ele-ments, yielding a larger denominator when computing edge prediction recall. Importantly, when considering full triplets (reflecting real functional reasoning rather than isolated edges), FunFact achieves notably higher recall, demonstrat-ing the value of jointly modeling relation structure instead of predicting edges independently. On FunThor , which provides exhaustive annotations across both object-object and part-object relations, FunFact 

again achieves large improvements over OpenFunGraph. The gains of 39.0pp / 37.1pp (R@3/5) in overall triplet re-call show the benefits of hierarchical relation proposal and our factor-graph inference, which resolves visually ambigu-ous cases that pairwise baselines misclassify. Performance on SceneFun3D follows a different trend. Here, OpenFunGraph attains higher recall with respect to SceneFun3D’s highly generic labels such as “handle”, “knob”, or “button”. These broad categories lead to sys-tematic mismatches with FunFact ’s open-vocabulary pre-dictions (e.g., “television stand” vs “cabinet”), despite the predictions being semantically correct. We identified sev-eral such cases manually. In contrast, FunThor , via its rule-based fine-grained annotation, exhibits far fewer label-mismatch artifacts. This leads to a cleaner picture of functional prediction accuracy and highlights a limitation of CLIP/BERT-based matching protocols when interacting with open-vocabulary outputs. Overall, the triplet results across all three datasets demonstrate that FunFact ’s holistic factor-graph formula-tion and hierarchical relation proposal meaningfully im-prove functional scene understanding, particularly in set-tings with dense annotations and diverse relation types. Table 2. Triplet Evaluation. We report node association, edge prediction and overall triplet recall as Recall@K (R@5/R@10) on Scene-Fun3D and FunGraph3D and (R@3/R@5) on FunThor .                                                                

> Methods SceneFun3D FunGraph3D FunThor
> Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@3 R@5 R@3 R@5 R@3 R@5 OpenFunGraph 68.3 73.0 88.1 96.2 60.4 70.3 45.8 49.3 65.1 91.4 29.8 45.0 26.4 26.4 59.0 66.7 15.1 17.6 FunFact (Ours) 62.1 71.8 66.1 80.7 41.0 57.9 71.1 80.0 67.9 79.9 48.7 63.9 60.8 62.8 88.9 87.1 54.1 54.7

Figure 5. Qualitative Results. Top: Input images with detected functional objects. Bottom-left: Reconstructed object and part point clouds with predicted functional relations (red: confidence 

< 0.5; yellow: confidence ≥ 0.5). Bottom-right: Final functional 3D scene graph after confidence thresholding; red edges indicate object-part hierarchy and gray edges indicate functional relations. 

4.4. Detailed Confidence Evaluation 

In prior works, functional relation prediction performance has only been evaluated using Recall@K metrics due to the sparsity of the manually annotated edges. Thanks to the dense functional relation annotations in FunThor , we are able to comprehensively evaluate not only recall but also precision and confidence calibration of predicted functional relations. In particular, we report the expected calibration error (ECE) [13] for edge confidence. This measures the error with respect to a perfect confidence where, e.g., out of all 60% confident edges, 60% are correct. We report the ECE over all edges, as well as specifically for challenging ambiguous cases of light switches and stove knobs. We threshold predicted functional relation probabilities at 0.5 for precision and recall, and use all predictions to compute ECE. Since OpenFunGraph reports confidence only for edges involving “outlet,” “switch,” and “remote,” we assign confidence 1.0 to all other predicted relations. Other baselines do not report confidence scores and are ex-cluded from this evaluation. For each metric, we report top-3 retrieval for object matching and relation matching. We calculate the overall triplet precision as Ptr = nma /n de where nma is the num-ber of correctly predicted functional relation triplets and nde 

is the total number of predicted triplets. The overall triplet recall is calculated as Rtr = nma /n gt where ngt is the total number of ground truth triplets in the scene. ECE is com-puted following the standard definition [13]: 

ECE =

> M

X

> m=1

|Bm|

n |acc (Bm) − conf (Bm)| , (2) where n is the total number of predictions, M is the num-ber of bins, Bm is the set of samples whose predicted con-fidences fall into bin m, acc (Bm) and conf (Bm) are the accuracy and average confidence of bin m respectively. We use 4 bins ( M = 4 ) for this evaluation. According to the results in Tab. 3, our method outper-forms OpenFunGraph across all metrics, demonstrating that our method not only predicts more accurate functional rela-tions but also provides better calibrated confidence scores. Notably, our method achieves a substantial 8.5% abso-lute improvement in precision compared to OpenFunGraph, highlighting its effectiveness in resolving visual ambiguities through scene-wide context. 

4.5. Ablation Studies 

To evaluate the effectiveness of different components in our method, i.e., hierarchical object and part mapping and factor graph reasoning, we conduct ablation studies on FunThor .Specifically, we investigate the impact of removing (i) the factor graph reasoning module and (ii) the hierarchical rep-resentation of objects and parts during mapping and merg-ing. We follow the same evaluation protocol as in Sec. 4.4, using top-3 retrieval for object and relation matching, and filtering out all edges with a confidence score below 0.5. As shown in Tab. 3, both components contribute signifi-cantly to the overall functional prediction performance. The factor graph reasoning module infers confidence scores for visually ambiguous relations by leveraging scene-wide con-text. While this suppresses some uncertain predictions and slightly reduces recall, it substantially improves precision by eliminating low-confidence edges. The net effect is a marked improvement in F1 score, demonstrating that the module effectively resolves relational ambiguities by rea-soning over the full scene. The hierarchical object-part representation during map-ping is equally important. We ablate this component by treating all detected parts as individual objects during map-ping and merging. While object mapping recall remains similar to the full model, since the object-type pipeline is Table 3. A BLATION STUDY AND CALIBRATION SCORES ON THE FunThor DATASET . We report mapping quality (Recall@3), functional edge scores (Precision, Recall, F1; higher is better), and calibration metrics (ECE, ECE-ambiguous; lower is better).                                                

> Methods Mapping Functional Graph
> Recall @ 3 (↑)Prec. [%] Recall [%] F1 [%] ECE Objects Inter. Elem. Overall Nodes (↑)(↑)(↑)All (↓)Ambiguous (↓)
> OpenFunGraph 54.6 41.1 51.2 23.4 12.2 16.0 0.43 0.51 FunFact (Ours) 68.2 69.5 68.5 31.9 49.3 38.7 0.36 0.07
> w/o FactorGraph 68.2 69.5 68.5 21.9 53.4 31.1 0.70 0.45 w/o Hierarchical Object and Part proposal 68.9 41.8 62.1 21.6 18.2 19.8 0.36 0.14

unchanged, interactive element mapping recall drops sig-nificantly, causing a substantial decrease in triplet precision, recall, and F1. The flattened pipeline loses the ability to fo-cus on objects with small interactive elements and associate them correctly, which is crucial for accurate functional rela-tion prediction. We further note that without the Hierarchi-cal Object and Part proposal, the interactive element map-ping recall is quite close to that of the OpenFunGraph [46] baseline (41.8% vs 41.1%), which also treats all interactive elements as individual objects during mapping. This further demonstrates the importance of hierarchical detection of ob-jects and their parts for effective discovery and association of small interactive elements with their parent objects. 

## 5. Limitations and Future Work 

FunFact offers a principled method for inferring functional structure through a unified scene- and factor-graph formu-lation; however, opportunities for improvement remain: First, we observe that our method can both over- and under-segment objects. For example, a wall with multi-ple cabinets may occasionally be fused into one instance. Part segmentation is also often ambiguous: while Fun-Graph3D [46] annotates only a single microwave control panel, our method may instead produce separate parts for each button. This finer granularity is rarely captured in ex-isting datasets, making benchmarking difficult and sensitive to visual and semantic ambiguity. Second, our pipeline currently relies heavily on LLM-based reasoning, which introduces non-negligible inference latency on the order of several seconds per image. Although this is still competitive with or faster than some existing SOTA methods, it limits applicability in strict real-time settings and on resource-constrained platforms. In future work, we aim to bridge the gap to robotics and embodied intelligence more closely. Our formulation naturally incor-porates new evidence to update beliefs (as shown in Fig. 6), while better calibration enables more precise identification of uncertain connections. Together, these properties sup-port combining functional scene graph reconstruction with informed robotic verification and real-world exploration. Evidence 

> Prior Estimate
> Posterior
> Element Detection

Figure 6. Examples of our dual factor graph and interactive verification. We highlight how our dual graph can be used to cal-ibrate functional predictions over time. Thicker and darker blue edges indicate higher confidence, while thinner and lighter blue edges represent less probable associations. In the beginning, each knob-burner edge receives confidence solely from the proximity and cardinality priors. After introducing evidence (i.e., the left knob controls the left burner plate), our model propagates this in-formation to update the remaining three knob–burner associations. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We present FunFact , a probabilistic framework for open-vocabulary functional 3D scene understanding. It recon-structs functional objects from posed RGB-D images and proposes semantically plausible relations, which are jointly refined through factor graph inference. By incorporating LLM-derived commonsense priors and geometric cues as factors, FunFact resolves local ambiguities via global scene context, yielding substantially better-calibrated confidence estimates than pairwise reasoning alone. To enable detailed evaluation of precision and confi-dence, we introduce FunThor , a synthetic benchmark built on AI2-THOR [23] with more systematic and comprehen-sive functional annotations than existing datasets. Across FunGraph3D [46] and FunThor , FunFact consistently out-performs state-of-the-art baselines, validating the benefits of holistic probabilistic modeling for functional scene un-derstanding. Acknowledgements 

This work was partially supported by the ETH AI Cen-ter, the Swiss National Science Foundation through the Na-tional Centre of Competence in Digital Fabrication (NCCR dfab), and Huawei Tech R&D (U.K.) through a research funding agreement. Additional support was provided by ETH Foundation Project 2025-FS-352 and SNSF Advanced Grant 216260. The authors also thank Dr. Cesar Dario Ca-dena Lerma for his insightful feedback on the mathematical notation used in this work, and Wanru Zhao for her expert assistance in the preparation of the figures. 

## References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 ,2023. 2 [2] Christopher Agia, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Mohamed Khodeir, Ondrej Miksik, Vibhav Vineet, Mustafa Mukadam, Liam Paull, and Florian Shkurti. Taskography: Evaluating robot task planning over large 3d scene graphs. In Proceed-ings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 46–58. PMLR, 2022. 2 [3] Ankur Ankan and Johannes Textor. pgmpy: A python toolkit for bayesian networks. Journal of Machine Learning Re-search , 25(265):1–8, 2024. 5 [4] Iro Armeni, Zhi-Yang He, JunYoung Gwak, Amir R Zamir, Martin Fischer, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. 3d scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3d space, and cam-era. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international confer-ence on computer vision , pages 5664–5673, 2019. 2 [5] Meghan Booker, Grayson Byrd, Bethany Kemp, Aurora Schmidt, and Corban Rivera. Embodiedrag: Dynamic 3d scene graph retrieval for efficient and scalable robot task planning, 2024. 2 [6] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herv´ e J´ egou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Emerg-ing properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on com-puter vision , pages 9650–9660, 2021. 2 [7] Timoth´ ee Darcet, Maxime Oquab, Julien Mairal, and Piotr Bojanowski. Vision transformers need registers, 2023. 2 [8] Alexandros Delitzas, Ayca Takmaz, Federico Tombari, Robert Sumner, Marc Pollefeys, and Francis Engelmann. SceneFun3D: Fine-Grained Functionality and Affordance Understanding in 3D Scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 1, 2, 5 [9] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-formers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the asso-ciation for computational linguistics: human language tech-nologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171– 4186, 2019. 6 [10] Tim Engelbracht, Ren´ e Zurbr¨ ugg, Marc Pollefeys, Hermann Blum, and Zuria Bauer. Spotlight: Robotic scene un-derstanding through interaction and affordance detection. In 2025 IEEE-RAS 24th International Conference on Hu-manoid Robots (Humanoids) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2025. 2 [11] Elias Greve, Martin B¨ uchner, Niclas V¨ odisch, Wolfram Burgard, and Abhinav Valada. Collaborative dynamic 3d scene graphs for automated driving. In 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 11118–11124, 2024. 2 [12] Qiao Gu, Ali Kuwajerwala, Sacha Morin, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Bipasha Sen, Aditya Agarwal, Corban Rivera, William Paul, Kirsty Ellis, Rama Chellappa, et al. Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for per-ception and planning. In 2024 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 5021–5028. IEEE, 2024. 2, 6 [13] Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017. 2, 7, 4 [14] Daniel Honerkamp, Martin B¨ uchner, Fabien Despinoy, Tim Welschehold, and Abhinav Valada. Language-grounded dy-namic scene graphs for interactive object search with mobile manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 9(10): 8298–8305, 2024. 2 [15] Jiawei Hou, Xiangyang Xue, and Taiping Zeng. Hi-dyna graph: Hierarchical dynamic scene graph for robotic auton-omy in human-centric environments, 2025. 2 [16] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extract-ing actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pages 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022. 1 [17] brian ichter, Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-nikov, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Carolina Parada, Kanishka Rao, Pierre Sermanet, Alexander T Toshev, Vincent Van-houcke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Mengyuan Yan, Noah Brown, Michael Ahn, Omar Cortes, Nicolas Sievers, Clay-ton Tan, Sichun Xu, Diego Reyes, Jarek Rettinghouse, Jor-nell Quiambao, Peter Pastor, Linda Luu, Kuang-Huei Lee, Yuheng Kuang, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Kyle Jeffrey, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Jasmine Hsu, Keerthana Gopalakr-ishnan, Byron David, Andy Zeng, and Chuyuan Kelly Fu. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic af-fordances. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023. 1 [18] Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Alihusein Kuwajerwala, Qiao Gu, Mohd Omama, Tao Chen, Alaa Maalouf, Shuang Li, Ganesh Iyer, Soroush Saryazdi, Nikhil Keetha, et al. Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d mapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07241 , 2023. 2 [19] Mukul Khanna*, Yongsen Mao*, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. Habitat Synthetic Scenes Dataset (HSSD-200): An Analy-sis of 3D Scene Scale and Realism Tradeoffs for ObjectGoal Navigation. arXiv preprint , 2023. 1 [20] Ue-Hwan Kim, Jin-Man Park, Taek-Jin Song, and Jong-Hwan Kim. 3-d scene graph: A sparse and semantic rep-resentation of physical environments for intelligent agents. 

IEEE transactions on cybernetics , 50(12):4921–4933, 2019. 2[21] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-head, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment any-thing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international confer-ence on computer vision , pages 4015–4026, 2023. 2 [22] Sebastian Koch, Narunas Vaskevicius, Mirco Colosi, Pe-dro Hermosilla, and Timo Ropinski. Open3dsg: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs from point clouds with queryable objects and open-set relationships. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 14183–14193, 2024. 6 [23] Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, et al. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474 ,2017. 1, 2, 5, 8 [24] Kiriakos N Kutulakos and Steven M Seitz. A theory of shape by space carving. International journal of computer vision ,38(3):199–218, 2000. 2 [25] Chenyi Li, Guande Wu, Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan, Dishita Gdi Turakhia, Sonia Castelo Quispe, Dong Li, Leslie Welch, Claudio Silva, and Jing Qian. Satori: Towards proactive ar assistant with belief-desire-intention user modeling. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–24, 2025. 1 [26] Sergey Linok, Tatiana Zemskova, Svetlana Ladanova, Ro-man Titkov, Dmitry Yudin, Maxim Monastyrny, and Alek-sei Valenkov. Beyond bare queries: Open-vocabulary ob-ject grounding with 3d scene graph. In 2025 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 13582–13589. IEEE, 2025. 4 [27] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In Euro-pean conference on computer vision , pages 38–55. Springer, 2024. 3 [28] Dominic Maggio, Yun Chang, Nathan Hughes, Matthew Trang, Dan Griffith, Carlyn Dougherty, Eric Cristofalo, Lukas Schmid, and Luca Carlone. Clio: Real-time task-driven open-set 3d scene graphs. IEEE Robotics and Au-tomation Letters , 9(10):8921–8928, 2024. 2 [29] Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil and Rich Caruana. Predicting good probabilities with supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning ,pages 625–632, 2005. 4 [30] Songyou Peng, Kyle Genova, Chiyu Jiang, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Marc Pollefeys, Thomas Funkhouser, et al. Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open vocabularies. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 815–824, 2023. 2 [31] Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8494–8502, 2018. 1 [32] LI Qi and Kaichun Mo. Ifr-explore: Learning inter-object functional relationships in 3d indoor scenes. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022 , 2022. 2 [33] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 2, 5 [34] Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf. Sayplan: Ground-ing large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning. In Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 23–72. PMLR, 2023. 1 [35] Aaron Ray, Christopher Bradley, Luca Carlone, and Nicholas Roy. Task and motion planning in hierarchical 3d scene graphs, 2024. 2 [36] Antoni Rosinol, Andrew Violette, Marcus Abate, Nathan Hughes, Yun Chang, Jingnan Shi, Arjun Gupta, and Luca Carlone. Kimera: From slam to spatial perception with 3d dynamic scene graphs. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 40(12-14):1510–1546, 2021. 2 [37] Dennis Rotondi, Fabio Scaparro, Hermann Blum, and Kai O. Arras. Fungraph: Functionality aware 3d scene graphs for language-prompted scene interaction. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 4083–4090, 2025. 1, 2 [38] Ayca Takmaz, Elisabetta Fedele, Robert Sumner, Marc Pollefeys, Federico Tombari, and Francis Engelmann. Open-mask3d: Open-vocabulary 3d instance segmentation. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 68367–68390, 2023. 2 [39] Yixuan Wang, Leonor Fermoselle, Tarik Kelestemur, Ji-uguang Wang, and Yunzhu Li. Curiousbot: Interactive mo-bile exploration via actionable 3d relational object graph, 2025. 2 [40] Abdelrhman Werby, Chenguang Huang, Martin B¨ uchner, Abhinav Valada, and Wolfram Burgard. Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language-grounded robot navigation. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. 2 [41] Shun-Cheng Wu, Johanna Wald, Keisuke Tateno, Nassir Navab, and Federico Tombari. Scenegraphfusion: Incremen-tal 3d scene graph prediction from rgb-d sequences. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7515–7525, 2021. 2 [42] Shun-Cheng Wu, Keisuke Tateno, Nassir Navab, and Fed-erico Tombari. Incremental 3d semantic scene graph predic-tion from rgb sequences. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 5064–5074, 2023. 2 [43] Zhijie Yan, Shufei Li, Zuoxu Wang, Lixiu Wu, Han Wang, Jun Zhu, Lijiang Chen, and Jihong Liu. Dynamic open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for long-term language-guided mobile manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-ters , 10(5):4252–4259, 2025. 2 [44] Chengxi Ye, Yezhou Yang, Ren Mao, Cornelia Ferm¨ uller, and Yiannis Aloimonos. What can i do around here? deep functional scene understanding for cognitive robots. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4604–4611. IEEE, 2017. 1 [45] Hang Yin, Xiuwei Xu, Zhenyu Wu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Sg-nav: Online 3d scene graph prompting for llm-based zero-shot object navigation. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , pages 5285–5307. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc., 2024. 2 [46] Chenyangguang Zhang, Alexandros Delitzas, Fangjinhua Wang, Ruida Zhang, Xiangyang Ji, Marc Pollefeys, and Francis Engelmann. Open-vocabulary functional 3d scene graphs for real-world indoor spaces. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 19401–19413, 2025. 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 3 [47] Mike Zhang, Kaixian Qu, Vaishakh Patil, Cesar Cadena, and Marco Hutter. Tag map: A text-based map for spatial rea-soning and navigation with large language models. In Pro-ceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2120–2146. PMLR, 2025. 2 [48] Youcai Zhang, Xinyu Huang, Jinyu Ma, Zhaoyang Li, Zhaochuan Luo, Yanchun Xie, Yuzhuo Qin, Tong Luo, Yaqian Li, Shilong Liu, Yandong Guo, and Lei Zhang. Rec-ognize anything: A strong image tagging model. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops , pages 1724–1732, 2024. 2 FunFact: Building Probabilistic Functional 3D Scene Graphs via Factor-Graph Reasoning 

# Supplementary Material                

> A. Part Filtering 1B. FunThor Generation Process 1C. Instance Association and Merging Details 2D. Inference Time Analysis 2E. Pseudo-code for Functional Scene Graph Construction 2F. Alternative VLM Backbones 3G. Exclusive and Non-Exclusive Matching 3H. Confidence Histograms and Reliability Diagrams 4I . Additional Qualitative Results 5J. Potential Pipeline Adaptation for SceneFun3D dataset 10 K. VLM Prompt for Scene Analysis 10 L. LLM Prompt for Local Functional Proposal 11 M. LLM Prompt for Remote Functional Proposal 12

## A. Part Filtering 

To filter out spurious part detections on the background or having unreasonably large overlap with the parent ob-jects, we implement a part filter based on the overlap ra-tio between the part’s bounding box and the parent object’s bounding box. A part detection is discarded if the intersec-tion between the part’s bounding box and the parent object’s bounding box occupies: 1) less than 30% of the part’s bounding box ( i.e ., back-ground objects are incorrectly detected as functional parts of the parent object), or 2) more than 70% of the object’s bounding box ( i.e ., the model misdetects the object itself as one of its functional parts) 

## B. FunThor Generation Process 

To build FunThor , we follow a principled pipeline that pro-duces part-aware geometries and dense functional-relation annotations based on AI2-THOR [23] infrastructure. In ad-dition, we generate posed RGB-D images for each scene to support perceptual functional scene understanding. 

Scene selection. In all AI2-THOR scenes, a single light switch controls the lighting of the entire environment, re-   

> Figure 7. Examples of scene filtering for FunThor .Scenes are excluded if switch-light associations are ambiguous (left) or if pans are present on stove burners (right).

gardless of how many light fixtures are present or how many sub-switches the switch includes. To better reflect the real world settings, we exclude scenes where sub-switches can-not be heuristically assigned to controlled lights ( e.g ., a dual switch controls a single light or a quad switch controls three rows of lights). From the remaining set, we intentionally select scenes with higher visual ambiguity. For example, scenes with a hanging light controlled by a light switch sur-rounded by multiple floor lamps. For kitchen-type scenes, we additionally filter out those containing a pan on a stove burner to support burner detection. Fig. 7 illustrates exam-ples of excluded scenes. 

Part-level annotation. We decompose and anno-tate relevant object CAD models from AI2-THOR–Habitat dataset [19] in Blender, separating them into semantically meaningful parts ( e.g ., cabinet body and handle, appliance body and buttons, knobs and burners). This produces a li-brary of part-aware assets that can be instantiated in AI2-THOR scenes. 

Ground-truth object and part point clouds. Using these annotated assets, we construct ground-truth 3D point clouds for both objects and parts within AI2-THOR scenes. For each object instance, we uniformly sample points along ob-jects’ and their parts’ mesh surface, resulting in an object-and part-centric point cloud and object-part hierarchy. 

Functional relation annotation. We then annotate func-tional relations using a set of predefined annotation rules. Each rule is defined as a functional triplet in the format (first label, relation, second label). The rules are grouped into categories based on the matching strategies used, as shown below: 1. Exact matching - We annotate edges between node pairs with relation type “relation” if and only if the first node’s label exactly matches the triplet’s “first label” and the second node’s label exactly matches the triplet’s “sec-ond label”. Representative examples of rules employing this strategy include: knife slices apple; faucet fills kettle with water. 2. Proximity-based matching - For every node whose label matches the first label of the triplet, we identify the clos-est node matching the triplet’s “second label”. If such a node exists and the Euclidean distance between the node pair’s centers is less than one meter, we annotate a functional relation labeled as “relation” between them. Some examples of rules using this strategy include: cur-tains cover/uncover windows; faucets fill sinks with wa-ter; and faucets fill bathtubs with water. 3. Part-object and part-part matching - For objects that ex-hibit toggleable or openable properties in AI2-THOR and possess explicit functional part annotations such as power switches or handles (see Appendix B), we anno-tate the corresponding node pairs with their respective functional relations. Representative rules in this cate-gory include: lever pushes down to activate toaster; han-dle pulls to open door. 4. Manual matching - For semantically ambiguous rela-tions, we manually record affected node pairs and store these annotations in a JSON file for subsequent loading by the annotation pipeline. Currently, only stove knob-burner associations require manual matching. These rules are applied consistently across scenes to pro-duce dense and unbiased annotations for both part–object and object–object relations. 

View sampling and RGB-D capture. To mimic realistic partial observations, we randomly sample reachable poses in each scene and a camera pitch angle for each pose. From these viewpoints, we capture RGB-D sequences and cor-responding camera poses, with each scene containing 60 frames. These sequences form the input to our mapping and functional inference pipeline. 

Visibility filtering. Not all objects are visible from the sam-pled camera trajectories ( e.g ., items stored inside closed cabinets). To ensure that evaluation only considers ob-servable entities, we first fuse the posed RGB-D sequence into a class-agnostic point cloud and then retain only those ground-truth object and part points that lie within a fixed ra-dius of this fused cloud. Objects whose visible subset con-tains fewer than 10 points are discarded, and any functional relations involving discarded objects are removed. We store the remaining visible nodes and their functional edges as the final FunThor benchmark used in our experiments. 

## C. Instance Association and Merging Details 

We adopt a two-stage instance association and merging strategy to consolidate object and part detections across multiple frames into a unified 3D object-part map. In the first stage, we perform spatial association by computing the Intersection over Union (IoU) between the 3D bound-ing boxes of newly detected instances and those of existing scene instances. If the IoU exceeds a threshold of 0.03 ,the detections are considered to potentially correspond to the same instance, and we proceed to the second stage of semantic verification. In this stage, we use DINOv2 with registers [7] to extract 2D features from the RGB image for each detection and compute the cosine similarity between the feature of the newly detected instance and the existing scene instance. If the similarity exceeds a threshold of 0.5,we confirm that the two instances correspond to the same object or part and merge them by aggregating their point clouds. The label of the merged instance is then updated to reflect the most frequently occurring label among all de-tections composing the instance. If either the spatial as-sociation or semantic verification fails, the newly detected instance is treated as a new object or part and added to the scene map. It is worth noting that we only permit merg-ing between instances of the same category ( i.e ., object-to-object or part-to-part) to prevent erroneous associations. Objects are merged prior to parts. When objects are merged, their contained parts are also aggregated and become parts of the merged object. 

## D. Inference Time Analysis 

We analyze the inference time of FunFact on the Fun-Graph3D dataset, which consists of 14 scenes with an av-erage of 203.3 RGB-D frames per scene. In total, FunFact 

processes all 14 scenes in 27479s ( ≃ 7.6h). 

Scene reconstruction. FunFact processes each frame in 9.7s on average, encompassing GPT-based scene analysis, object and part detection, instance association, and merg-ing. Although FunFact queries GPT once per frame for scene analysis, this step accounts for nearly 93% of the to-tal stage runtime. Since scene analysis is performed inde-pendently for each frame, it can be straightforwardly paral-lelized across multiple concurrent GPT calls, which would significantly reduce the overall runtime. 

Functional scene graph creation. FunFact processes each scene in 26.3s on average, encompassing LLM-based func-tional proposal generation, edge and dual graph construc-tion, and factor graph inference. 

## E. Pseudo-code for Functional Scene Graph Construction 

A high-level pseudo-code for building the functional scene graph using FunFact is provided in Algorithm 1. The pro-cess consists of three main phases: (1) generating part-object and part-part connection factor graph (Lines 3– 16), (2) generating object-object connection factor graph (Lines 17–32), and (3) performing global inference to es-timate confidence scores and construct the final functional scene graph (Lines 33–39). At the beginning, we ini-tialize two empty lists, GL (Line 1) and GR (Line 2), to store EdgeGroups for part-object/part-part connections and object-object connections, respectively. For each LLM-proposed semantic functional proposal ( e.g ., remote control operates TV), we create an EdgeGroup that encapsulates all resulting edges ( e.g ., the edges connecting all pairs of re-mote controls and TVs) and their associated factor graph. The default edge confidence is set to the semantic confi-dence of the functional proposal. In phase 1, we iterate over each object with parts (Line 4) and obtain LLM-proposed part-object and part-part connections (Line 5). We assume proximity always holds for part-object and part-part con-nections, and we add a CardinalityFactor only when the proposal is believed by LLMs to be one-to-one (Line 10) (i.e . the functional connection is mutually exclusive, such as a stove knob only controlling one stove burner). In phase 2, we first obtain LLM-proposed object-object connections (Line 18) and build different factor graphs based on the na-ture of the proposed connections. If the proposal is one-to-one (Line 21), we include both ProximityFactor and Car-dinalityFactor; if the proposal requires proximity but is not one-to-one (Line 26), we only include ProximityFactor. Fi-nally, in phase 3, we combine all EdgeGroups (Line 34) and their factor graphs (Line 35), and perform marginal infer-ence (Line 36) to estimate confidence scores for all edges. These scores are then used to update the confidence of each EdgeGroup (Line 37) before constructing the final func-tional scene graph (Line 38). 

## F. Alternative VLM Backbones 

We evaluate the sensitivity of FunFact to the choice of VLM backbone by replacing GPT-4.1 with gemini-3-flash-preview and the open-weight qwen3-vl-32b-instruct. Scene reconstruction and triplet evaluation results are reported in Tab. 4 and Tab. 5, respectively. FunFact performs consis-tently well across all three backbones, demonstrating that its strong performance stems from the pipeline design rather than reliance on any particular VLM. 

## G. Exclusive and Non-Exclusive Matching 

When calculating recall to evaluate the mapping quality, following the evaluation protocol in [46], it is necessary to count how many ground-truth nodes are correctly mapped to predicted nodes. However, [46]’s protocol allows multi-ple ground-truth nodes to map to the same predicted node, which may lead to an overestimation of mapping quality. For instance, when multiple cabinets are located in close proximity, a single merged detection that spatially covers all cabinets may achieve perfect recall, as each ground-truth cabinet can map to the same predicted node. To more accu-

Algorithm 1 Build Functional Scene Graph                                                                                                                              

> Require: Object map Owith contained parts info
> Ensure: Functional scene graph
> 1: GL←[] ▷Local (part-object) based groups
> 2: GR←[] ▷Remote (object-object) groups
> 3: ▷Phase 1: Part-Object and Part-Part Connections
> 4: for each object o∈ O with parts do
> 5: P ← LLM-Propose-Parts( o,o.parts)
> 6: for each proposal p∈ P do
> 7: Create EdgeGroup gfrom p
> 8: Build FactorGraph Fgwith:
> 9: ProximityFactor( g)▷Encodes spatial closeness
> 10: if p.isOneToOne then
> 11: CardinalityFactor( g)▷Enforce one-to-one
> 12: end if
> 13: g. F ← F g▷Attach factors to g
> 14: Add gto GL▷Store local group
> 15: end for
> 16: end for
> 17: ▷Phase 2: Object-Object Connections
> 18: R ← LLM-Propose-Objects( O)▷LLM object connection proposals
> 19: for each proposal r∈ R do
> 20: Create EdgeGroup gfrom r
> 21: if r.isOneToOne then
> 22: Build FactorGraph Fgwith:
> 23: ProximityFactor( g)▷Encodes spatial closeness
> 24: CardinalityFactor( g)▷Enforce one-to-one
> 25: g. F ← F g
> 26: else if r.requiresProximity then
> 27: Build FactorGraph Fgwith:
> 28: ProximityFactor( g)▷Encodes spatial closeness
> 29: g. F ← F g
> 30: end if
> 31: Add gto GR▷Store remote group
> 32: end for
> 33: ▷Phase 3: Global Inference
> 34: G ← G L∪ G R
> 35: F ← S
> g∈G g. F▷Global factor graph
> 36: μ←MarginalInference( F)
> 37: UpdateConfidence( G,μ)
> 38: S ← BuildFSG( O,G)▷Final Functional Scene Graph
> 39: return S

rately assess mapping quality, we additionally evaluate the results under an exclusive matching constraint, where each predicted node maps to at most one ground-truth node. Ta-ble 6 presents the results under this setting. We observe a drop in recall for all methods under exclusive match-ing, indicating that some predicted nodes are mapped to multiple ground-truth nodes under non-exclusive matching. However, the relative performance between different meth-Table 4. Scene Reconstruction with Alternative VLM Backbones. We report Recall@K ( R@3 /R@10 ; higher is better) for three node categories— Objects , Interactive Elements , and Overall Nodes —on SceneFun3D and FunGraph3D , using gemini-3-flash-preview and qwen3-vl-32b-instruct as drop-in replacements for GPT-4.1. Bold numbers mark the best result per column. 

VLM Backbone SceneFun3D FunGraph3D 

Objects (↑) Inter. Elements (↑) Overall Nodes (↑) Objects (↑) Inter. Elements (↑) Overall Nodes (↑)

R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 gemini-3-flash-preview 94.3 97.1 63.2 74.5 73.5 82.0 93.2 95.9 68.8 78.8 79.0 85.9 

qwen3-vl-32b-instruct 92.4 98.1 64.2 72.2 73.5 80.8 88.4 94.5 59.4 73.3 71.6 82.2 

Table 5. Triplet Evaluation with Alternative VLM Backbones. We report node association, edge prediction and overall triplet recall as Recall@K (R@5/R@10) on SceneFun3D and FunGraph3D , and (R@3/R@5) on FunThor , using gemini-3-flash-preview and qwen3-vl-32b-instruct as drop-in replacements for GPT-4.1. Bold numbers mark the best result per column.                                                                 

> VLM Backbone SceneFun3D FunGraph3D FunThor
> Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)Node Assoc. ( ↑)Edge Pred. ( ↑)Overall Triplets ( ↑)R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@3 R@5 R@3 R@5 R@3 R@5 gemini-3-flash-preview 67.2 72.3 51.1 68.1 34.4 49.2 74.3 79.6 61.5 72.1 45.2 57.4 70.9 72.3 76.2 78.5 54.1 56.8
> qwen3-vl-32b-instruct 66.2 69.7 46.5 67.7 30.8 47.2 69.6 74.8 60.6 73.8 42.2 55.2 68.9 70.9 72.5 78.1 50.0 55.4

Table 6. Mapping Quality under Exclusive Matching. We report Recall@K ( R@3 /R@10 ; higher is better) for three node cate-gories— Objects , Interactive Elements , and Overall Nodes —on SceneFun3D , FunGraph3D , and FunThor under the exclusive matching constraint, where each predicted node maps to at most one ground-truth node. This provides a more accurate assessment of mapping quality compared to non-exclusive matching, which may overestimate performance when a single merged detection covers multiple ground-truth objects. All methods exhibit decreased recall under this stricter evaluation, but FunFact maintains superior performance across nearly all categories and datasets.                                                                          

> Methods SceneFun3D FunGraph3D FunThor
> Objects (↑)Inter. Elements (↑)Overall Nodes (↑)Objects (↑)Inter. Elements (↑)Overall Nodes (↑)Objects (↑)Inter. Elements (↑)Overall Nodes (↑)
> R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 OpenFunGraph 78.1 79.0 64.4 78.3 69.1 78.5 61.1 68.5 42.1 52.5 50.3 59.2 43.7 52.3 34.8 40.4 41.5 49.3 FunFact (Ours) 90.5 90.5 64.4 75.5 73.2 80.4 84.9 89.0 62.9 75.2 72.1 81.0 57.2 61.0 64.5 68.8 59.1 63.0

ods remains consistent, with our method outperforming the baselines by a significant margin except Recall@10 for in-teractive elements in SceneFun3D. 

## H. Confidence Histograms and Reliability Dia-grams 

Fig. 8 presents confidence histograms and reliability di-agrams for FunFact and OpenFunGraph on the FunThor 

dataset, providing a visual assessment of model calibration [29]. The confidence histogram illustrates the distribution of predicted confidence scores, while the reliability diagram compares predicted confidence against actual accuracy. We follow the procedure in [13] to plot the figures. We use a bin size of 4 ( i.e ., each bin spans a confidence interval of 0.25) to be consistent with the settings in Section 4.4. In the reliability diagram, the diagonal line represents perfect cal-ibration, and the red bars indicate the gap between average confidence and accuracy within each bin. Since OpenFun-Graph estimates confidence scores only for classes contain-ing “outlet,” “switch,” “power,” and “remote,” we assign a confidence of 1.0 to all other predictions when constructing these diagrams. When considering all predictions, FunFact produces a more uniform distribution of confidence scores across the full range, whereas OpenFunGraph assigns confidence scores only to a fixed subset of classes. Both models ex-hibit overconfidence and achieve comparable performance in the high-confidence range. This behavior is expected, as both methods rely primarily on visual data and LLM priors for functional relation prediction, with limited visual cues available to assess the reliability of high-confidence predic-tions. However, when examining ambiguous classes specifi-cally, FunFact demonstrates superior calibration compared to OpenFunGraph, yielding confidence scores that better align with actual accuracy. This improvement stems from 

FunFact ’s use of a factor graph to estimate confidence scores holistically across all edges, incorporating global context and inter-dependencies among multiple functional relations. For instance, when multiple switches and lights coexist in a scene, FunFact can reason about mutual exclu-sivity among different switch-light pairs, resulting in better-0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0      

> Confidence
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> % of Predictions
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Confidence
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> Gap
> Perfect Calibration

(a) All predictions (Ours) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0       

> Confidence
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> % of Predictions
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Confidence
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> Gap
> Perfect Calibration

(b) All predictions (OpenFun-Graph) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0      

> Confidence
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> % of Predictions
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Confidence
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> Gap
> Perfect Calibration

(c) Ambiguous classes only (Ours) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0       

> Confidence
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> % of Predictions
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Confidence
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> Accuracy
> Gap
> Perfect Calibration

(d) Ambiguous classes only (Open-FunGraph) 

Figure 8. Calibration analysis on FunThor dataset. Each sub-figure shows a confidence histogram (top) and reliability diagram (bottom). 

calibrated confidence scores. In contrast, OpenFunGraph makes independent predictions for each object pair without considering broader contextual information, leading to less reliable confidence estimates for ambiguous classes. 

## I. Additional Qualitative Results 

In this section, we present qualitative results for both the mapping stage and functional scene graph construction stage of FunFact on the SceneFun3D (Fig. 9 and 10), Fun-Graph3D (Fig. 11), and FunThor datasets (Fig. 12). Each figure comprises four subfigures arranged from left to right and top to bottom as follows: (a: top-left) ground truth point cloud with node and functional relation annotations; 

(b: top-right) reconstructed object- and part-centric point cloud with predicted node labels and functional relations; 

(c: bottom-left) predicted functional scene graph with one node selected (highlighted); (d: bottom-right) visualiza-tion of the selected node in the reconstructed point cloud along with all functional relations associated with that node. In subfigures (a) and (b), black node labels indicate matched nodes, while red node labels indicate unmatched nodes. Similarly, blue arrows denote matched functional relations, and red arrows denote unmatched functional re-lations. In subfigure (c), the selected node is highlighted in dark blue, red edges indicate object-part hierarchical re-lationships (always directed from object to part), and gray edges represent functional relations. In subfigure (d), the bounding box of the selected node is highlighted in blue, and all functional relations involving the selected node are visualized using green lines. For the SceneFun3D and FunGraph3D datasets, our re-construction quality is generally high, with most objects and parts accurately detected and labeled. Our pipeline con-sistently identifies more functional elements and functional relations than those annotated in the ground truth, reveal-ing the sparse annotation limitations of existing datasets. In Fig. 9, we demonstrate some misalignment between pre-dicted node labels and ground truth labels, where all drains are labeled as “button/knob” and the trash bin pedal is la-beled as “handle” in the ground truth. Due to this mis-alignment, some functional relations are incorrectly marked as unmatched despite being correctly predicted. This issue highlights the limitations of existing evaluation protocols for open-vocabulary functional scene graphs. For the FunThor dataset, our method effectively recon-structs objects and parts in complex indoor scenes, accu-rately capturing functional relations such as stove knobs op-erating burners and light switches controlling lights. These qualitative results demonstrate the effectiveness of Fun-Fact in mapping and understanding functional scene graphs across diverse datasets. Figure 9. Scene dev/421063/42444511 of SceneFun3D. See Section I for detailed subfigure descriptions. As shown in the top-right subfigure, we predict semantically correct functional relations in this bathroom scene, but none of them are matched to ground truth as indicated by the red arrows. This is due to several annotation issues in the dataset: (1) node label mismatches where “drains” are incorrectly labeled as “button/knob” and the trash bin “pedal” is labeled as “handle” in ground truth; (2) the ground truth label “foucet” is a typo and can never match our correct prediction “faucet”; (3) even when node labels match, our open-vocabulary relation prediction “handle turn or pull to open or close door” cannot be matched to the ground truth annotation “handle rotate to open or close door” because when computing semantic similarity using BERT embeddings, the ground truth relation does not rank in the top-5 most similar relations, despite clearly describing the same interaction to humans. These issues lead to zero matched relations despite semantic correctness. Beyond ground truth, our method identifies additional functional relations, including “towel ring can hold towel” and “towel radiator can dry towel” (highlighted in bottom-left graph and bottom-right point cloud viewer). Figure 10. Scene dev/422007/42446017 of SceneFun3D. See Section I for detailed subfigure descriptions. This baby bedroom scene highlights how the SceneFun3D dataset overly focuses on knob-pull interactions to open cabinets and drawers. Nearly all ground-truth annotations involve such interactions, with only one exception for radiator temperature adjustment. The dataset overlooks inter-object and intra-object functional relations that are crucial for understanding the scene. As shown in the top-right subfigure (predictions) and bottom-left subfigure (functional scene graph), our method identifies these missing relations, including “power button press to turn on/off humidifier” and “baby monitor camera watch crib”, demonstrating our pipeline’s ability to capture diverse functional interactions beyond the narrow focus of existing annotations. Figure 11. Scene 4livingroom of FunGraph3D. See Section I for detailed subfigure descriptions. Our pipeline predicts most ground-truth functional relations, including power outlet-to-kettle connections and oven knob temperature/mode adjustments. We highlight “kettle” in the bottom two subfigures to demonstrate that our pipeline captures both inter-object relations ( e.g ., power outlet provides power to kettle) and intra-object relations ( e.g ., lid flip to open kettle). Figure 12. Scene FloorPlan5 of FunThor . See Section I for detailed subfigure descriptions. We illustrate the dense and complete ground-truth annotations for the FunThor dataset (top-left). Our pipeline accurately detects functional parts of objects ( e.g ., burners and knobs of the stove; buttons of the coffee machine). As only predicted functional relations with confidence scores above 0.5 are displayed in the functional scene graph, only the two outermost knobs are predicted to functionally connect to their respective outermost burners in the graph. J. Potential Pipeline Adaptation for Scene-Fun3D dataset 

As discussed in Section 4.2, SceneFun3D primarily fo-cuses on part annotations, especially on knob and han-dle parts. It systematically annotates knob-shaped com-ponents ( e.g ., sink drains and radiator valves) with the generic label “knob”, leading to lexical discrepancies be-tween open-vocabulary predictions and ground-truth labels, thereby negatively impacting both mapping and functional relation evaluation. To isolate the effects of the evaluation protocol from actual pipeline performance on this issue ( i.e ., “knob” and “drain” are semantically far apart in CLIP em-bedding space), we modify the mapping pipeline to always detect knobs and handles whenever the scene analysis VLM identifies any functional parts in an object. This adaptation yields two key effects: first, it forces detection of knobs and handles independent of VLM proposals, thereby increas-ing recall for these part categories; second, it promotes as-signment of generic “knob” and “handle” labels to merged knob- and handle-shaped components, as these labels be-come more prevalent during the merging process and are selected as the most common label (see Section C for merg-ing details). Table 7 presents results on SceneFun3D after pipeline adaptation. Both mapping and functional relation met-rics improve substantially; notably, the modified pipeline surpasses OpenFunGraph on all mapping-related metrics. Functional relation recall increases significantly due to im-proved part detection with aligned labels. However, over-all triplet Recall@5 remains below OpenFunGraph, primar-ily due to semantic variations in relation descriptions. For instance, the ground-truth relation “handle rotate to open or close door” is functionally equivalent to our predicted “handle turn or pull to open or close door,” yet not ranked in the top-5 retrieval during evaluation. When relaxing the evaluation to consider top-10 retrieval, our method achieves an overall triplet recall of 75.9%, outperforming OpenFun-Graph’s 70.3%. This performance reversal highlights the sensitivity of triplet recall to top-k selection and suggests that our predictions capture correct semantics despite lexi-cal differences. However, enforcing knob and handle detection can intro-duce false positives, which indirectly affects functional re-lation precision. To assess the impact of this adaptation, we evaluate the modified pipeline on FunThor for both map-ping and functional relation metrics, as shown in Table 8. The results indicate that the adaptation indeed significantly improves the recall of interactive elements and functional relations, but also leads to a substantial decrease in preci-sion and F1 score for functional relations. Nevertheless, the modified pipeline still achieves better F1 score for func-tional relation than OpenFunGraph (25.1% vs. 16.0%) on 

FunThor . Given the reduced precision, however, we adopt the original pipeline for general applications, while the modified version can be beneficial for datasets with known annotation patterns. 

## K. VLM Prompt for Scene Analysis 

We provide the complete prompt used for scene analysis in our mapping pipeline. This prompt instructs the vision-language model to identify functional objects and their in-teractive parts from RGB images of indoor scenes, includ-ing bounding box localization and part enumeration.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

> You are an expert at identifying functional objects in an RGB image of an indoor scene. Your task is to identify all functional objects and their interactive parts or interfaces that have potential functional relationships with other objects in the scene. Afunctional relationship means that the state change of one object will affect the state of other objects, or one object can be used to change the state of other objects. For example, turning on alight switch will turn on lights, turning a stove knob will turn on aburner, and using akey can open aspecific lock or door. ## Extra Guidelines 1. If ahandle appears rounded, resembles aknob, and is attached to acompartment to aid in opening or closing it (such as acabinet or drawer), label this part as ‘knob handle‘. 2. For all other handles that are functional components of an object (such as adoor handle or drawer handle, except when covered in point 1), simply use ‘handle‘ as the part name, without specifying the handle type. ## Input Format -Asingle RGB image of an indoor scene. ## Output Format Your response should be astructured JSON object containing alist of identified objects. For each object, provide: -name: Acommon name for the object (e.g ., ’stove’, ’light switch’). Avoid using ’and’ or ’or’ in the name. -description: Aspecific description that helps identify the object in the scene. This can include: -Spatial information (e.g ., ’a cabinet above a sink’). -Feature descriptions (e.g ., ’light switch with dual switches’). -Or both. -functional parts: Alist of functional parts of the object (e.g ., for a’stove’: [’burner’, ’knob’]). -If the object has no functional parts, leave this empty. -List multiple parts separately. -Avoid using ’and’ or ’or’ in the functional parts. -bounding box: The bounding box coordinates in the format [x min, y min, x max, y max]. -Coordinates should be normalized to the range [0, 1] relative to the image dimensions. -Origin (0, 0) is at the top-left corner. -xincreases to the right, yincreases downwards. -The bounding box should be tight around the object, excluding the background.

Table 7. Performance after pipeline adaptation on SceneFun3D. To address SceneFun3D’s systematic annotation of knob-shaped and handle-shaped components ( e.g ., drains, valves, lever) with generic “knob” and “handle” labels, we modify our pipeline to always detect knobs and handles when functional parts are identified. The modified pipeline substantially improves both mapping and functional relation metrics, surpassing OpenFunGraph on all mapping metrics and achieving competitive triplet recall, especially at R@10 (75.9% vs. 70.3%). 

Methods Mapping Functional Graph 

Objects ( ↑) Inter. Elements ( ↑) Overall Nodes ( ↑) Node Assoc. ( ↑) Edge Pred. ( ↑) Overall Triplets ( ↑)R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@3 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 R@5 R@10 OpenFunGraph 81.1 87.8 71.0 79.5 73.0 82.8 68.3 73.0 88.1 96.2 60.4 70.3 FunFact (Modified) 90.5 95.2 76.4 88.7 81.1 90.9 76.4 83.1 75.8 91.4 57.9 75.9 

Table 8. Evaluating side effects of the pipeline adaptation. To determine whether forcing knob and handle detection negatively affect overall mapping and functional prediction performance, we evaluate both the original and modified pipelines on FunThor . The modified pipeline significantly improves recall for interactive elements (69.5% → 87.9%) and functional relations (49.3% → 58.1%), but substan-tially decreases precision (31.9% → 16.0%) and F1 score (38.7% → 25.1%), confirming that the modification negatively affects the overall performance. Nevertheless, the modified pipeline still outperforms OpenFunGraph in F1 score (25.1% vs. 16.0%). 

Methods Mapping Functional Graph 

Recall @ 3 (↑) Prec. [%] Recall [%] F1 [%] Objects Inter. Elem. Overall Nodes (↑) (↑) (↑)

OpenFunGraph 54.6 41.1 51.2 23.4 12.2 16.0 FunFact (Original) 68.2 69.5 68.5 31.9 49.3 38.7 

FunFact (Modified) 68.2 87.9 73.1 16.0 58.1 25.1 

## L. LLM Prompt for Local Functional Proposal 

We provide the complete prompt used for generating lo-cal functional proposals between objects and their parts. This prompt guides the language model to propose plausi-ble part-object and part-part functional connections, assign prior confidence scores, and determine whether each con-nection type is inherently one-to-one. 

You are an expert in understanding functional connections between objects and their parts in indoor scenes. A functional connection means that the state change of one object will affect the state of other objects, or one object can be used to change the state of other objects. For example, turning on a light switch will turn on the lights, turning a stove knob will turn on a burner, and using a key can open a specific lock or door. You are given a JSON string describing a parent object and its potential interactable parts. Your task is to: (1) propose plausible, semantically distinct functional connections between the parent object and its parts, as well as among the parts themselves; (2) provide a confidence score for each functional connection; and (3) indicate whether each connection is ‘‘one-to-one’’ or not. You are required to output a list of functional proposals in JSON format. A functional proposal is made of a functional connection in triplet format <first item> <interaction> <second item>, a confidence score, and an ‘‘is one to one’’ flag. You should only output semantically different functional proposals, and do not repeat the same type of interaction for different subjects/objects with the same name. For example, for a cabinet with multiple handles, only output a single functional 

proposal ‘‘handle pull to open cabinet’’. After proposing the function connection, you are required to give a confidence score of this connection semantically, like how correct it sounds based on common knowledge. If you are confident about your proposal based on common sense, like ‘‘handle - pull to open - cabinet’’, give a high score above 0.9. If you are unsure about your proposal and need more data to validate it, but it can still exist in reality, assign a low confidence score of around 0.5. If you believe the proposed functional connection is inherently ‘‘one-to-one’’ in general, for example, a light switch usually controls a single light, not multiple lights, set the flag ‘‘is one to on’’. On the other hand, a cabinet may contain multiple handles, and all of its handles can pull to open it. Therefore, the connection ‘‘handle pull to open cabinet’’ is not ‘‘one-to-one’’. The given JSON comes from a mapping pipeline, which may contain detection errors and misannotation. If the parent object contains an illogical part, for example, a faucet has a part named ‘‘lock’’, treat the part as a detection error and do not propose any functional connection for it. ## Pay attention - Do not use passive voice in the ‘‘interaction’’ field. Use active voice instead. Swap the first and second items to avoid passive voice. For example, instead of ‘‘light is turned on/off by switch’’, use ‘‘switch turns on/off light’’. ## Input format A JSON describing an object and its potential interactable parts. It has the following fields: - object name: The name of the parent object. - object description: A short description of the parent object. - contained parts: List of part names that the parent object contains. ## Output format A JSON of a list of your functional proposals. Each proposal should contain the following fields: - first item name: Name of the first item of this proposal. It should be one of the part names from the given JSON input. - second item name: Name of the second item of this proposal. It should be one of the part names or the parent object name from the given JSON input. - interaction: A short sentence describing the action imposed by the first item on the second item (e.g ., ‘‘pull to open’’, ‘‘turns on/off’’, ‘‘controls’’). - confidence: Prior confidence score for this connection in general. The range is [0, 1]. - is one to one: Whether this connection type is inherently one-to-one. Your task is to propose plausible functional proposals between the object and its parts and among the parts themselves, give a confidence score of your functional proposal, and indicate whether such a connection is ‘‘one-to-one’’ or not. 

## M. LLM Prompt for Remote Functional Pro-posal 

We provide the complete prompt used for generating object-object functional proposals. This prompt instructs the lan-guage model to identify inter-object functional connections, assign prior confidence scores, and determine the properties of each connection (one-to-one relationships and proximity requirements). 

You are an expert at identifying functional connections between objects in indoor scenes. Afunctional connection means that the state change of one object affects the state of other objects, or one object can be used to change the state of other objects. For example, turning on a light switch turns on the lights; rotating a stove knob activates on a burner; and using a key can unlock aspecific lock or door. You are given a JSON string describing a list of objects. Your task is to: (1) propose plausible, semantically distinct functional connections between these objects; (2) provide aconfidence score for each functional connection; (3) indicate whether each connection is ‘‘one-to-one’’ or not; and (4) indicate whether each connection is a local and require close proximity between the two objects. You are required to output a list of functional proposals in JSON format. A functional proposal is made of a functional connection in a triplet format <first item> <interaction> <second item>, aconfidence score, and an ‘‘is one to one’’ flag. You should only output semantically different functional proposals, and do not repeat the same type of interaction for different subjects/objects with the same name. For example, if there are multiple switches and lights in the object list, only output a single functional proposal ‘‘switch turn on/off light’’. After proposing the function connection, you are required to give a confidence score of this connection semantically, like how correct it sounds based on common knowledge. If you are confident about your proposal based on common sense, like ‘‘power outlet - provide power to - TV’’, give a

high score above 0.9. If you are unsure about your proposal and need more data to validate it, but it can still exist in reality, assign a low confidence score of around 0.5. If you believe the proposed functional connection is inherently ‘‘one-to-one’’ and exclusive in general, for example, a light switch usually controls asingle light, not multiple lights, set the flag ‘‘is one to one’’. On the other hand, a power socket may provide power to multiple appliances; therefore, the connection ‘‘power socket provides power to appliances’’ is ‘‘one-to-many’’ and not ‘‘one-to-one’’. If you believe that the proposed functional connection requires close proximity between the two objects to function properly, for example, a ‘‘faucet pours water into sink’’ requires the faucet to be close to the sink, set the flag ‘‘is local’’ to true. If the functional connection can work regardless of the distance between the two objects, for example, a ‘‘remote control operates TV’’ can work from a distance, set the flag ‘‘is local’’ to false. ## Pay attention - Do not use passive voice in the ‘‘interaction’’ field. Use active voice instead. Swap the first and second items to avoid passive voice. For example, instead of ‘‘light is turned on/off by switch’’, use ‘‘switch turns on/off light’’. ## Input format A JSON describing a list of objects: - objects: A list of objects. Each object contains the following fields: - name: Name of the object. - description: A short description of the object. ## Output format A JSON of a list of your functional proposals. Each proposal should contain the following fields: - first item name: Name of the first item of this proposal. It should be one of the object names from the given JSON input. - second item name: Name of the second item of this proposal. It should be one of the object names from the given JSON input. - interaction: A short sentence describing the action imposed by the first item on the second item (e.g ., ‘‘pull to open’’, ‘‘turns on/off’’, ‘‘controls’’, ‘‘provide power to’’, etc.). - confidence: Prior confidence score for this connection in general. The range is [0, 1]. - is one to one: Whether this connection type is inherently one-to-one. - is local: Whether this connection is local ( i.e ., the two objects need to be close to each other). Your task is to propose plausible, semantically distinct functional proposals between the given objects, give confidence scores of your functional proposals, indicate whether such a connection is ‘‘one-to-one’’ or not, and indicate whether the connection is local or not.