Title: Efficient Transceiver Design for Aerial Image Transmission and Large-scale Scene Reconstruction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11098v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:50:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Efficient Transceiver Design for Aerial Image Transmission and Large-scale Scene Reconstruction 

Zeyi Ren ∗, Jialin Dong ∗, Wei Zuo †, Yikun Wang †, Bingyang Cheng †, Sheng Zhou ∗, and Zhisheng Niu ∗∗Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 

†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 

Emails: zeyiren0827@outlook.com, {zuowei, ykwang, bycheng }@eee.hku.hk, {djl23@mails., sheng.zhou@, niuzhs@ }tsinghua.edu.cn 

Abstract —Large-scale three-dimensional (3D) scene recon-struction in low-altitude intelligent networks (LAIN) demands highly efficient wireless image transmission. However, existing schemes struggle to balance severe pilot overhead with the transmission accuracy required to maintain reconstruction fi-delity. To strike a balance between efficiency and reliability, this paper proposes a novel deep learning-based end-to-end (E2E) transceiver design that integrates 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) directly into the training process. By jointly optimizing the communication modules via the combined 3DGS rendering loss, our approach explicitly improves scene recovery quality. Further-more, this task-driven framework enables the use of a sparse pilot scheme, significantly reducing transmission overhead while maintaining robust image recovery under low-altitude channel conditions. Extensive experiments on real-world aerial image datasets demonstrate that the proposed E2E design significantly outperforms existing baselines, delivering superior transmission performance and accurate 3D scene reconstructions. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Within the emerging paradigm of low-altitude intelligent networks (LAIN) [1], unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are playing an increasingly pivotal role in tasks such as au-tonomous exploration [2], infrastructure inspection [3], [4], and search-and-rescue [5]. These advanced applications are often required to perform large-scale three-dimensional (3D) scene reconstruction for comprehensive environmental percep-tion [6], [7]. However, the physical realization and computa-tional efficiency of such high-fidelity scene reconstruction are governed by the efficient and reliable wireless transmission of massive aerial image data [8]. Therefore, developing an efficient and robust image transmission mechanism is a critical imperative for downstream reconstruction tasks in low-altitude scenarios. However, achieving efficient transmission remains a chal-lenge for traditional wireless transceivers. Conventional sys-tems rely heavily on the inserting of pilot sequences to per-form accurate channel estimation. Yet, in the highly dynamic channels typical of UAV tasks, tracking rapid fading requires massive pilot overhead [9]. This excessive overhead severely occupies the limited resources that should be dedicated to actual image payloads, fundamentally degrading the overall transmission efficiency. To alleviate this overhead, emerging pilotless transceivers maximize spectral efficiency but face severe reliability is-sues [10]–[13]. Without explicit pilot signals, adapting to 

Fig. 1. Illustration of the low-altitude intelligent network imagery scenario. Traditional full pilot schemes suffer from prohibitive signaling overhead, whereas the proposed AI-driven sparse pilot transmission improves spectral efficiency for downstream 3D scene reconstruction. 

fast-varying low-altitude channels relies entirely on end-to-end joint training. However, this process is fundamentally bottlenecked by extreme parameter asymmetry between the lightweight transmitter and the highly parameterized receiver. Consequently, erratic gradient propagation prevents learning robust constellations, ultimately compromising the down-stream 3D scene reconstruction. From the above arguments, a critical dilemma emerges: traditional massive pilots guarantee reliability at the cost of efficiency, whereas pilotless schemes maximize efficiency but fail to provide the robustness required for accurate recon-struction. To strike a balance between transmission efficiency and image fidelity, this paper proposes a novel deep learning-based end-to-end (E2E) transceiver design incorporating a sparse pilot scheme. Specifically, instead of using dense grids, this paper introduces a method that multiplexing a minimal number of pilot symbols into the data stream to serve as es-sential channel anchors [14]. At the transmitter, a Transformer-based modulator is developed to learn channel-resilient con-stellation mappings. Concurrently, a ResNet-driven Deep-Rx network [10] is deployed at the receiver to jointly execute channel estimation and signal recovery based on these sparse anchors. By jointly optimizing the transmitter and receiver networks, our framework significantly reduces pilot overhead while maintaining robust image recovery under complex low-altitude channel conditions. Additionally, conventional image transmission schemes op-timize solely for pixel-level fidelity (e.g., mean squared er-ror) [15], neglecting the impact of different image regions on downstream 3D geometry [16]. To bridge the gap between 

> arXiv:2604.11098v1 [cs.CV] 13 Apr 2026

physical-layer transmission and scene reconstruction, we di-rectly integrate 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17], [18] into the E2E training loop. By formulating a task-oriented loss function that jointly evaluates novel view synthesis quality and signal recovery, the transceiver implicitly learns to prioritize the transmission of geometric and photometric features critical for 3D reconstruction. This rendering-aware method ensures that under a restricted sparse pilot overhead, wireless resources are strategically allocated to maximize 3D scene fidelity. Extensive evaluations on realistic aerial datasets demon-strate the dual advantages of the proposed E2E transceiver de-sign. Compared to the ideal full-pilot transmission, our method achieves substantially higher efficiency while maintaining a nearly identical block error rate (BLER). Moreover, it demon-strates superior performance over conventional architectures and deep learning baselines in both transmission reliability and downstream 3D scene reconstruction quality. II. S YSTEM MODEL 

Consider a downlink massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication system where a single terrestrial base station (BS) serves an UAV. The BS is equipped with a uniform planar array (UPA) consisting of NBS antennas and the UAV is equipped with a uniform linear array (ULA) of NUAV 

antennas. 

A. Spatial Configuration 

We adopt a 3D Cartesian coordinate system. The BS is located at a fixed position pBS = (0 , 0, h BS ), where hBS 

denotes the antenna height. The UAV is located at p(t) = (x(t), y (t), z (t)) with a velocity vector v(t) ∈ R3×1 at time instant t. Due to the high altitude of UAVs, the communication links are characterized by high probabilities of Line-of-Sight (LoS) propagation and significant Doppler shifts caused by UAV mobility. The horizontal distance between the BS and UAV is given by: r = px2 + y2. And the Euclidean distance is: d =pr2 + ( hBS − z)2. The elevation angle from the BS to UAV plays a crucial role in UAV channel characteristics, which can be expressed as 

θ = arcsin 

 |hBS − z|

r



∈

h

0, π

2

i

, (1) and the azimuth angle is modeled as 

ϕ = arctan 

 yx



. (2) 

B. 3D Non-Stationary UAV Channel Model 

Unlike traditional terrestrial channels, the air-to-ground (A2G) channel exhibits strong LoS components and 3D scat-tering characteristics. We adopt a geometry-based stochastic model (GBSM) extended from the 3GPP specifications [19]. The uplink channel matrix H ∈ CNBS ×NUAV from the UAV to the BS can be modeled as a superposition of a deterministic LoS component and a stochastic Non-LoS (NLoS) component: 

H = pβ

r κκ + 1 HLoS +

r 1

κ + 1 HNLoS 

!

, (3) where β represents the large-scale fading coefficient, and 

κ = A exp( Bθ ) is the Rician factor (with environment-dependent constants A and B), denoting the power ratio of the LoS component to the NLoS multipath components. This modeling captures the empirical observation that higher elevation angles typically lead to stronger LoS components. 

Large-Scale Fading: The coefficient β incorporates distance-dependent path loss and shadow fading, expressed in linear scale as β = 10 −(L+ξ)/10 . Here, ξ ∼ N (0 , σ 2

> sh

)

represents the log-normal shadowing, and L = PLoS (z) ·

LLoS + (1 − PLoS (z)) · LNLoS is the path loss determined by the height-dependent LoS probability PLoS (z).

LoS Component: The LoS component is determined by the array steering vectors and the Doppler shift, expressed as 

HLoS = aBS (ϕA, θ A)aH

> UAV

(ϕD, θ D)ej2πν LoS t, (4) where ϕD and θD represent the azimuth and elevation Angles of Departure (AoD) at the UAV, while ϕA and θA denote the Angles of Arrival (AoA) at the BS. The Doppler shift is νLoS = 1 

> λ

vT r, where λ is the carrier wavelength and r

specifies the unit direction vector. Assuming NBS = Ny Nz , the array response vector for the BS UPA is given by: 

aBS (ϕ, θ ) = 1

√NBS 

1, . . . , e j 2πda λ (ny sin ϕ sin θ+nz cos θ), . . . . . . , e j 2πda λ (( Ny −1) sin ϕ sin θ+( Nz −1) cos θ)T ,

(5) where 0 ≤ ny < N y , 0 ≤ nz < N z , and da is the antenna spacing. Similarly, aUAV denotes the uniform linear array response vector for the UAV. 

NLoS Component: The NLoS component models the scat-tering environment and consists of K propagation clusters: 

HNLoS = 1

√K

> K

X

> k=1

gkaBS (ϕA 

> k

, θ A 

> k

)aH

> UAV

(ϕD 

> k

, θ D 

> k

)ej2πν k t,

(6) where gk ∼ CN (0 , 1) is the complex gain of the k-th path, and νk is the associated Doppler shift. 

C. Signal Transmission and Reception 

The UAV transmits a data stream containing the compressed aerial images to the BS. Let s ∈ CNUAV ×1 denote the trans-mitted signal vector. The received signal vector y ∈ CNBS ×1

at the BS is: 

y = Hs + n, (7) where n ∼ CN (0, σ 2INBS ) denotes the additive white Gaus-sian noise (AWGN) vector. Assuming the BS employs a linear combining vector or a learning-based neural network decoder to process y, the transmitted bitstreams can be efficiently recovered for downstream 3D scene reconstruction. 1            

> LDPC QAM Moduformer
> Q
> K
> V
> Multi-Head
> Attention (MHA)
> Add & Norm
> Linear
> Embedding
> Position
> Embedding
> FFN
> Add & Norm
> Linear Layer
> & Activation
> ∆𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> IFFT FFT LDPC CE EQ DE-Mod
> Conv2D
> ReLU
> GroupNorm
> Conv2D
> ReLU
> GroupNorm
> Conv2D
> Conv2D
> LLR
> Deep-Rx
> Rsidual Block ×N
> H.265/HEVC
> Channel
> Transmitter
> ... HEVC ...
> ...
> ...
> ...
> ...
> Receiver 3D GS M odel Fig. 2. Architecture of the proposed task-oriented end-to-end transceiver. The transmitter utilizes a Transformer-based Moduformer for resilient constellation mapping, while the receiver employs a Deep-Rx network. Both modules are jointly optimized driven by the 3DGS rendering loss.

III. P ROPOSED TRANSCEIVER DESIGN 

In general, conventional transceiver designs employ eigen zero-forcing (EZF) precoding [20] at the transmitter, while relying on least squares (LS) or weighted minimum mean square error (WMMSE) algorithms [21] for channel estimation followed by EZF for equalization at the receiver. However, the performance of such modular processing architectures are limited, as they independently optimize each component and heavily rely on the acquisition of perfect channel state information (CSI). To bypass the need for explicit mathematical models and achieve better performance, the paradigm has gradually shifted towards E2E deep learning methods. Recently, in many advanced deep learning-based transceiver designs, constellation point learning is widely adopted. Let 

C = {c1, c 2, . . . , c M } denote the set of constellation points for an M -ary modulation scheme. Existing methods treat these constellation coordinates cm ∈ C directly as trainable parameters, optimizing their geometric distribution, which can be written as 

˜c = c − 12M

P2M 

> i=1

ci

r

> 12M

P2M 

> i=1

|ci|2 − 12M

P2M 

> i=1

ci 

> 2

. (8) While this approach has primarily been validated in single-input multiple-output (SIMO) systems, it exhibits severe train-ing instability and degraded performance when applied to MIMO systems under dynamic low-altitude UAV channels. A primary reason for this bottleneck is the imbalance in the number of trainable parameters between the transmitter and the receiver. While the neural receiver (e.g., Deep-Rx) typically employs deep convolutional networks with millions of parameters to combat complex fading, the transmitter only possesses 2M parameters (e.g., 32 parameters for 16-QAM). During the E2E joint training via backpropagation, this severe parameter asymmetry causes the transmitter’s gradients to vanish or fluctuate wildly, making it incapable of learning robust constellation representations for harsh A2G channels. 

A. Transmitter Architecture and Moduformer 

To overcome this fundamental limitation, this paper pro-poses a Transformer-based modulation architecture, termed 

Moduformer , utilizing a residual learning strategy. As illus-trated in the transmitter module, standard QAM mapping is first applied to generate an initial, coarse symbol sequence 

x = [ x1, . . . , x N ]T ∈ CN ×1. Rather than directly learning the absolute constellation positions, the Moduformer takes 

x as input to dynamically generate a sequence of channel-resilient perturbations ∆x ∈ CN ×1. The ultimately transmitted frequency-domain symbol vector ˆx is obtained via residual addition: 

ˆx = x + ∆ x. (9) The internal structure of the Moduformer leverages the self-attention mechanism to capture long-range dependencies among the transmitted symbols. The input complex sequence 

x is first projected into a higher-dimensional real-valued latent space via linear embedding, and superimposed with positional embeddings to form the initial state E0. The features are then processed by a multi-head attention (MHA) module and a feed-forward network (FFN), both accompanied by residual connections and layer normalization (Add & Norm): 

Eattn = LayerNorm  E0 + MHA( E0), (10) 

Eout = LayerNorm  Eattn + FFN( Eattn ). (11) Finally, a linear layer with activation maps the latent represen-tation Eout back to the complex domain to yield the learned perturbation ∆x.The proposed Moduformer architecture fundamentally re-solves the Tx-Rx parameter imbalance by equipping the trans-mitter with sufficient learning capacity. Crucially, because the self-attention mechanism embeds rich, long-range structural correlations directly into the data payload, the system’s re-liance on traditional, dense pilot sequences for channel estima-tion is significantly reduced. This naturally facilitates a highly efficient, sparse-pilot transmission scheme that maximizes the effective throughput for aerial imagery. Furthermore, the Algorithm 1 E2E Training Algorithm 

Require: Aerial images I, camera poses P, UAV channel H,learning rate η.

Ensure: Optimal network parameters Θ∗ 

> Tx

and Θ∗

> Rx

. 

> 1:

for epoch e = 1 to Emax do  

> 2:

for each mini-batch (I, p) ∈ (I, P) do  

> 3:

Tx: Encode I to bitstreams b and initial QAM symbols x. 

> 4:

Tx: Compute ˆx = x + Moduformer (x; Θ Tx ) and multiplex sparse pilots to form transmitted signal s. 

> 5:

Channel: Receive signal y = Hs + n. 

> 6:

Rx: Process y via Deep-Rx (y; Θ Rx ) to recover bits 

ˆb and images ˆI. 

> 7:

3D-GS: Render novel views Irender using recovered images ˆI and poses p. 

> 8:

Loss: Ltotal = LBCE (b, ˆb) + ψ (1 −

α)L1(I, I render ) + αLSSIM (I, I render ). 

> 9:

Update: Θ ← Θ − η∇ΘLtotal , where Θ ∈{ΘTx , ΘRx }. 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

end for 

perturbation learning strategy ensures that the training starts from a solid baseline (standard QAM), requiring the network only to learn the necessary geometric distortions to combat specific channel fading. Ultimately, this synergy drastically accelerates convergence, improves E2E training stability, and delivers superior robustness in low-altitude environments. 

B. Receiver Architecture and Loss Function Design 

ResNet-based Deep-Rx architecture has been widely es-tablished as highly effective solutions for E2E transceiver designs [10]. By replacing isolated signal processing blocks with a unified convolutional network, this architecture inher-ently mitigate the cascading errors typical of modular designs, adeptly executing joint channel estimation, equalization, and demodulation through robust non-linear mappings. However, when applied to downstream large-scale 3D scene reconstruction, conventional receiver designs are fundamen-tally limited by their strict optimization for isolated physical layer metrics (e.g., block error rate) or simple image-level losses (e.g., mean squared error). These metrics often fail to capture the complex multi-view geometric consistency and high-frequency textural details strictly required for robust 3DGS. To bridge this gap between the communication link and the downstream task, this paper proposes a task-driven E2E optimization strategy. After standard decoding and image recovery, the data are fed directly into the 3DGS frame-work. Rather than isolating these stages, the proposed method seamlessly integrate the 3DGS rendering performance into the transceiver’s training process. Our approach directly employ the 3D scene rendering loss to guide the parameter updates of  

> Fig. 3. BLER comparison of various transmission schemes versus SNR.

both the transmitter’s Moduformer and the receiver’s Deep-Rx. The E2E task-driven loss function can be formulated as: 

Ltotal = LBCE + ψ



(1 − α)L1 + αLSSIM 



, (12) where LBCE denotes the binary cross-entropy loss for bit recovery at the receiver. For the novel view synthesis task, L1

represents the L1 photometric loss measuring the pixel-wise absolute difference between the rendered and ground-truth images, while LSSIM incorporates the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) to preserve high frequency structural details and perceptual quality. In the second term, ψ serves as a task-weighting hyperparameter to align the scale of the gradients between the two domains, and α strictly balances the structural perception of the SSIM index with the pixel level fidelity. The overall architecture of the transceiver design is shown in Fig. 2. 

C. E2E Training Scheme 

The detailed E2E training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. During the forward pass, the source images 

I are processed by the Moduformer at the transmitter and transmitted over the simulated dynamic UAV channel. Upon reception, the Deep-Rx module jointly recovers the bitstreams and images, which are subsequently rendered by the 3DGS framework to evaluate the rendering loss. The network param-eters of both the transmitter and receiver, denoted jointly as 

Θ ≜ {ΘTx , ΘRx }, are concurrently updated using a stochastic gradient descent-based optimizer with a learning rate η:

Θ∗ = arg min  

> Θ

E(I,p)∈(I,P)

Ltotal (Θ) ,

where the expectation is taken over the mini-batches of images and their corresponding camera poses. This unified parameter update mechanism seamlessly couples the physical layer representations with the geometric priors required for 3D reconstruction. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We consider a wireless system where an UAV equipped with NU AV = 4 antennas transmits signals to a BS featuring a massive MIMO array of NBS = 64 antennas. The system operates in a single-stream configuration to focus on the reliability of the underlying link. For error correction, a 5G NR-compliant low-density parity-check (LDPC) scheme is employed with a code rate of r = 0 .5. The waveform is Fig. 4. Effective throughput comparison across varying SNRs. (a) (b)  

> Fig. 5. Quantitative evaluation of novel view synthesis quality. (a) PSNR versus training iterations. (b) SSIM versus training iterations.

based on orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), characterized by Nc = 72 subcarriers and Ns = 14 OFDM symbols per slot, forming a resource grid of 72 × 14 resource elements (REs). Full Pilot (f -pilot): Represents the conventional pilot-assisted baseline. It reserves two complete OFDM symbols per slot for pilot transmission, providing dense reference signals to the receiver. Sparse Pilot ( s-pilot): Specifically, s-pilot only occupies a fraction of the resource grid (e.g., a comb-type pattern in a single symbol), reducing the pilot overhead by 90% compared to f -pilot. 

A. Datasets 

To evaluate our method in large-scale, real-world scenarios, we utilize extensive UAV imagery from the GauU-Scene [22] and Mega-NeRF [23] datasets. 

1) Training Set: For robust generalization, our training set encompasses 20,000 high-resolution UAV images from two main sources, enabling the model to learn comprehensive geometric and appearance priors:  

> •

GauU-Scene V2: Five sub-datasets (SZIIT, CUHK-SZ Lower/Upper Campus, SMBU, and LFLS) covering di-verse academic and urban environments.  

> •

Mega-NeRF (Mill 19): The Building and Rubble scenes, which introduce industrial and debris-filled textures. 

2) Testing Set: For evaluation, we specifically employ the HAV (He Ao Village) sub-dataset from GauU-Scene. This dataset provides a highly complex urban topology, serving as a rigorous benchmark to test the model’s reconstruction fidelity and overall performance limits. 

B. Performance Comparision 

We first evaluate transmission performance using BLER and throughput to quantify link reliability and effective data rate.  

> Fig. 6. Qualitative visualization of the reconstructed 3D scenes.

Our proposed Moduformer & Deep-Rx (s pilot) is compared against four schemes. 16QAM & Perfect CSI (f pilot) serves as the theoretical upper bound. Practical baselines include the conventional 16QAM & EZF+WMMSE (f pilot), alongside two sparse-pilot learning variants: Cons-Learning & Deep-Rx [11] and 16QAM & Deep-Rx. As shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, evaluating across an SNR range of -4 to 4 dB, our method significantly outperforms both conventional and learning-based baselines in BLER. Com-pared to the constellation learning approach, the Moduformer better balances parameter scale and training stability. This ensures robust symbol reconstruction that closely approaches the perfect CSI bound, despite utilizing minimal pilot in-formation. Furthermore, our design consistently achieves the highest throughput among all practical schemes. This advan-tage is directly attributed to the sparse pilot strategy, which significantly minimizes reference overhead and maximizes the spectral efficiency of the end-to-end system. Finally, we evaluate the novel view synthesis quality of the reconstructed 3DGS models. As shown in Fig. 5, our proposed 

Moduformer & Deep-Rx consistently yields higher Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and SSIM across all training iterations compared to both the constellation learning and 16QAM baselines. This improvement highlights the advantage of joint 3DGS and transceiver training, as the Transformer-based transmitter effectively captures global spatial depen-dencies. By prioritizing critical geometric features during modulation, this context-aware encoding ensures robust scene reconstruction against channel fading. The qualitative superi-ority of our method is further visually corroborated by the rendered 3D scene in Fig. 6. V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper proposed a task-oriented end-to-end transceiver with a sparse pilot scheme for efficient aerial image trans-mission and robust 3D scene reconstruction. To combat dy-namic low-altitude channels while minimizing pilot overhead, we introduced a Transformer-based Moduformer for channel-resilient modulation and a Deep-Rx network for joint signal recovery. By integrating 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) di-rectly into the training loop, the communication modules are jointly optimized via downstream rendering loss. Evaluations on real-world datasets demonstrate that our approach signif-icantly outperforms conventional baselines. Specifically, the proposed Moduformer improves PSNR by 6.2% and SSIM by 5.3%, while maintaining a strictly lower BLER and boosting throughput by approximately 78% at 0 dB SNR. REFERENCES [1] S. Zhou, B. Xie, D. Shen, W. Feng, Z. Jiang, and Z. Niu, “Agile coverage for low-altitude aerial intelligent networks: A blended hyper-cellular solution,” China Communications , vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 22–36, 2025. [2] P. Zhong, B. Chen, S. Lu, X. Meng, and Y. Liang, “Information-driven fast marching autonomous exploration with aerial robots,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 810–817, 2022. [3] M. Zhang, C. Feng, Z. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Luo, Z. Wang, J. Zhou, S. Shen, and B. Zhou, “Soar: Simultaneous exploration and photograph-ing with heterogeneous uavs for fast autonomous reconstruction,” in 

2025 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intel. Robot. Sys. (IROS) , 2025, pp. 10 975– 10 982. [4] B. Zhao, Q. Duan, G. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Song, J. Wen, X. Liu, Q. Li, L. Lei, J. Zhang, X. Chen, M. W. Mueller, and B. M. Chen, “Lightweight yet high-performance defect detector for uav-based large-scale infrastructure real-time inspection,” in 2025 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , 2025, pp. 13 675–13 682. [5] C. Yu, Z. Lu, J. Mei, and B. Zhou, “Perception-aware planning for quadrotor flight in unknown and feature-limited environments,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intel. Robot. Sys. (IROS) , 2025, pp. 3533–3540. [6] J. Zha, Y. Fan, T. Zhang, G. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Gao, and X. Chen, “Aircopbench: A benchmark for multi-drone collaborative embodied perception and reasoning,” in AAAI , 2026. [7] X. Huang, J. Li, T. Wu, X. Zhou, Z. Han, and F. Gao, “Flying in clutter on monocular rgb by learning in 3d radiance fields with domain adaptation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , pp. 1–8, 2026. [8] Z. Li, X. Jin, G. Li, S. Wang, M. Wen, H. Arslan, D. Wing Kwan Ng, and C. Xu, “Stt-gs: Sample-then-transmit edge gaussian splatting with joint client selection and power control,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. , vol. 12, pp. 4417–4432, 2026. [9] Y. Qin and R.-A. Pitaval, “Low cubic metric reed-muller sequence design for pilot-less transmission,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 364–368, 2022. [10] F. Ait Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “End-to-end learning for ofdm: From neural receivers to pilotless communication,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. ,vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1049–1063, 2022. [11] J. Cheng, W. Chen, and B. Ai, “Adaptive end-to-end transceiver design for nextg pilot-free and cp-free wireless systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 44, pp. 3055–3069, 2026. [12] Y. Leng, Q. Lin, L.-Y. Yung, J. Lei, Y. Li, and Y.-C. Wu, “Unveiling the power of complex-valued transformers in wireless communications,” 

IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 74, pp. 612–627, 2026. [13] W. Yu, K. B. Letaief, and L. Zheng, “Sensing for free: Learn to localize more sources than antennas without pilots,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. ,vol. 44, pp. 3285–3301, 2026. [14] B. Yang, W. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Radio map-based beamforming assisted with reduced pilots,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 8878–8891, 2025. [15] X. Kang, B. Song, J. Guo, Z. Qin, and F. R. Yu, “Task-oriented image transmission for scene classification in unmanned aerial systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 5181–5192, 2022. [16] Y. Wan, C. Liu, S. Wang, T. Zhang, J. J. Yu, K. Ye, D. Niyato, and C. Xu, “Edge collaborative gaussian splatting with integrated rendering and communication,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2026. [17] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨ uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Trans. Graph. ,vol. 42, no. 4, July 2023. [18] C. Liu, H. Li, Z. Li, S. Wang, W. Xu, K. Ye, D. W. K. Ng, and C. Xu, “Communication efficient robotic mixed reality with gaussian splatting cross-layer optimization,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. , vol. 12, pp. 1948–1962, 2026. [19] 3GPP, “AI and ML for NR air interface in Rel-20 5G-Advanced,” NVIDIA, Tech. Rep. RP-242759, Dec 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/TSGRAN/TSGRAN/TSGR106/Docs/RP-242759.zip [20] X. Zhao, M. Li, Y. Liu, T.-H. Chang, and Q. Shi, “Communication-efficient decentralized linear precoding for massive mu-mimo systems,” 

IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 71, pp. 4045–4059, 2023. [21] X. Pan, Z. Zheng, X. Huang, and Z. Fei, “Wmmse-based joint transceiver design for multi-ris-assisted cell-free networks using hybrid csi,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 7654–7669, 2025. [22] B. Xiong, N. Zheng, J. Liu, and Z. Li, “Gauu-scene v2: Assessing the reliability of image-based metrics with expansive lidar image dataset using 3dgs and nerf,” 2024. [23] H. Turki, D. Ramanan, and M. Satyanarayanan, “Mega-nerf: Scalable construction of large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs,” in CVPR , June 2022, pp. 12 922–12 931.