Title: SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30239v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:44:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 

Xin Dong 1,2, Weijian Deng 1, Lihan Zhang 1, Tianru Dai 1, Wenfeng Deng 2, and Yansong Tang 1† 

> 1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University  

> 2

Pengcheng Laboratory † Corresponding Author 

dong-x23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Abstract. This work addresses the problem of recovering complete, simulatable object geometry from reconstructed real-world scenes, en-abling physics-based interaction with objects embedded in the scene. While modern multi-view reconstruction methods can produce visually accurate environments, objects are often incomplete due to occlusions and limited observations, making them unsuitable for physics simula-tion. To address this limitation, we propose SAM3D-Phys, a frame-work that integrates scene reconstruction with generative 3D priors of SAM3D to recover physically simulatable objects. Our approach first reconstructs the scene from multi-view images to obtain scene geom-etry and partial observations of objects. We then leverage SAM3D to infer complete object geometry from these partial observations. To en-sure that the recovered objects remain consistent with the reconstructed scene, we restore scene-consistent object states through two complemen-tary strategies: a physics-constrained spatial optimization algorithm that iteratively aligns the recovered object to its original location, and a mask-guided appearance distillation module that refines texture fidelity based on the observed images. By recovering complete object geometry and restoring its pose and appearance within the scene, SAM3D-Phys produces clean object representations suitable for physics-based simu-lation, enabling simultaneous and physically consistent interactive sim-ulation of multiple objects within a reconstructed scene. Project page: https://chnxindong.github.io/sam3d-phys/ 

Keywords: Interactive Reconstruction · Generative 3D Priors · Object–Scene Alignment · Physical Simulation 

# 1 Introduction 

Interactive simulation in reconstructed 3D environments is important for many applications, including virtual reality [16, 29], robotic manipulation [18, 27, 28], interactive video generation [1, 8, 22], multi-modal application [46] and world modeling for embodied intelligence [9, 25, 37, 47]. Recent advances in neural ren-dering and Gaussian splatting enable detailed reconstruction of real-world scenes from multi-view images, producing visually accurate environments that support  

> arXiv:2605.30239v1 [cs.CV] 28 May 2026 2X. Dong et al.

tasks such as novel view synthesis and scene understanding. However, enabling reliable physics-based interaction in reconstructed scenes remains challenging, particularly in real-world environments containing multiple interacting objects. A key difficulty arises from the fact that objects reconstructed from real-world observations are often incomplete or partially observed. In large scenes, objects may occupy only a small number of pixels, and occlusions or limited viewpoints further reduce the available geometric information. Consequently, reconstructed objects frequently contain missing regions or irregular geometry. While such artifacts may be tolerable for visual rendering, they become prob-lematic when performing physics-based simulation, where coherent and complete object geometry is typically required. The challenge becomes more pronounced when multiple objects interact simultaneously, as geometric inaccuracies can propagate through object contacts and interactions during simulation, leading to unstable or physically implausible dynamics. Several recent approaches at-tempt to bridge reconstruction and physics simulation by representing scene elements as simulation particles or by incorporating physical priors into recon-struction [23, 26, 45, 48]. However, these methods often assume relatively simple scenes or focus on single-object interactions. In cluttered real-world scenes with multiple objects and mutual occlusions, reconstruction errors can accumulate and compromise both object geometry and the stability of physical interactions. A potential way to address incomplete geometry is to leverage generative 3D models [5, 39, 44], which encode shape priors learned from large-scale data and can infer plausible object structures from partial observations. However, integrating such priors into reconstructed scenes is challenging, since generated objects must remain consistent with the observed scene geometry, appearance, and spatial configuration to support physically meaningful interactions. In this work, we explore how generative 3D priors can complement scene reconstruction to enable interactive simulation in real-world multi-object scenes. We propose SAM3D-Phys, a training-free framework that combines multi-view reconstruction with the generative 3D priors of SAM3D [5] to recover object representations that are suitable for physics-based simulation. Starting from a reconstructed scene, our method first extracts partial observations of individual objects. We then leverage SAM3D to infer more complete object geometry that is consistent with the available visual evidence, allowing the recovery of structures that cannot be reconstructed from images alone. To ensure that the recovered objects remain consistent with the reconstructed scene, we introduce mechanisms that enforce both spatial and visual coherence. A physics-constrained spatial optimization aligns the recovered object with its original scene location by estimating its pose under physical constraints. In addi-tion, a mask-guided appearance distillation module refines object textures using image observations to maintain visual consistency with the scene. Once aligned and refined, the recovered objects are reintroduced into the reconstructed en-vironment and simulated using a Material Point Method (MPM) framework, enabling physically plausible multi-object interactions. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 3Spatial Alignment Mask-based Appearance Distillation    

> Metric Cue Appearance Cue
> C. Object-Scene Alignment
> Punctured Scene Inpainted Scene
> PGSR  Remove
> Objects
> PGSR
> Fine Tune
> LaMa Inpaint
> Original Scene
> A. Scene Reconstruction
> D. Multi-Object Physical Interaction
> ……
> Physical Simulation: Interaction
> MPM
> Solver
> Generative Prior
> Extracted Objects
> B. Object Extraction

Fig. 1: SAM3D-Phys Overview. The pipeline consists of four major steps: (A) Scene reconstruction, where the scene is reconstructed from multi-view images using PGSR, followed by object removal and inpainting to obtain a clean background scene; (B) Ob-ject extraction, where target objects are segmented and converted into complete 3D ge-ometry using image-to-3D generation with SAM3D; (C) Object–scene alignment, where appearance cues and metric cues guide mask-based appearance distillation and physics-constrained spatial alignment to restore the objects’ pose and appearance within the scene; (D) Multi-object physical interaction, where the aligned objects are inserted back into the scene and simulated using MPM solver to enable interactive dynamics. 

The proposed pipeline is training-free and runs efficiently on consumer hard-ware. To evaluate the method under realistic conditions, we construct a real-world multi-object benchmark composed of both self-captured and web-collected scenes. Experiments show that the proposed approach can recover more com-plete object representations and support stable multi-object interactions while maintaining consistency with the reconstructed environment. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 

– We study interactive physical simulation in reconstructed multi-object scenes, where objects are often incomplete due to occlusions and limited observa-tions, and propose SAM3D-Phys, a training-free framework that combines scene reconstruction with the generative 3D priors of SAM3D to recover object geometry suitable for physics-based simulation. 

– We introduce two mechanisms to ensure object-scene alignment: (1) physics-constrained object–scene alignment, which estimates object pose and place-ment within the scene, and (2) mask-guided appearance distillation, which refines object textures using image observations. 4 X. Dong et al. 

– We construct a real-world multi-object benchmark and demonstrate that SAM3D-Phys enables stable, realistic, and physically consistent object in-teractions in reconstructed real-world scenes. 

# 2 Related Work 

Physics-Based Dynamic 3D Animation Physics-based dynamic 3D ani-mation integrates neural representations with physical simulation to model re-alistic object motion. PAC-NeRF [21] estimates object geometry and physical parameters from multi-view videos using a hybrid Eulerian–Lagrangian repre-sentation with a differentiable Material Point Method (MPM) simulator. Phys-Gaussian [45] embeds Newtonian dynamics into 3D Gaussian representations to model physically plausible deformation and stress without explicit meshes. PhysDreamer [48] distills motion priors from video generative models to enable dynamic responses of static 3D objects. Learning realistic material properties re-mains challenging due to limited supervision. DreamPhysics [15] distills motion priors from video diffusion models to learn material fields that drive physics-based MPM simulations. Physics3D [24] extends this direction by learning di-verse material properties from diffusion priors and incorporating them into a viscoelastic simulation framework. PhysFlow [26] further combines multimodal foundation models with video diffusion to refine material parameters for dy-namic scene simulation. Feature Splatting [31] integrates physics simulation with vision–language semantics for automatic material assignment. DecoupledGaus-sian [38] enables object-level simulation by separating foreground objects from contacted surfaces in real videos. However, it mainly handles single-object sep-aration and assumes planar contact surfaces, limiting multi-object interactions. 

Object Extraction from Images. Generative models have made significant strides in reconstructing 3D scenes from 2D images. LRM [10] and LGM [35] pioneered the use of feed-forward models to enable rapid inference from single images. To further enhance generation quality, Trellis [43], Seed3D [7], and Hun-yuan3D 2.0 [36] integrated massive datasets and diffusion priors, achieving high-fidelity results. However, these approaches generally reconstruct the entire image content indiscriminately, often producing geometries that lack the physical re-alism required for simulation. For masked object extraction, O 2-Recon [13] and Amodal3R [40] proposed utilizing diffusion priors to recover occluded shapes, though their performance was constrained by reliance on synthetic training data. Subsequently, SAM3D [5] addressed this limitation by leveraging large-scale data to improve robustness in diverse scenarios. Despite these advances, existing works fail to simultaneously extract multiple objects from real scenes and restore them to their original 3D spatial positions. This loss of positional context, combined with insufficient geometric fidelity, renders current pipelines inadequate for downstream physics-based simulations. 

Object Pose Estimation. Object 6DoF pose estimation aims to recover the 3D position and orientation of objects from visual observations. Existing meth-SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 5

ods are broadly categorized into model-based and model-free approaches. Model-based methods assume access to object geometry during inference. MegaPose [19] estimates poses of unseen objects using large-scale synthetic training data and a render-and-compare refinement strategy. GS-Pose [2] constructs multiple object representations from posed RGB images and refines poses using differentiable 3D Gaussian Splatting rendering. Pos3R [6] leverages 3D reconstruction foundation models to extract geometry-consistent features, enabling training-free pose esti-mation from a single RGB image. Model-free approaches estimate object poses without object models. iG-6DoF [3] proposes an iterative framework based on 3D Gaussian Splatting that generates initial pose hypotheses using rotation-equivariant features and refines them through render-and-compare optimization. Despite these advances, robust pose estimation in complex scenes with large mo-tions and multiple interactions remains challenging. 

# 3 SAM3D-Phys 

3.1 Preliminaries 3D Scene Representation. We use 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] to rep-resent scenes as point clouds, with each point modeled as G = {(xi, Σ i, C i, α i)}i∈P ,where xi denotes the centroids of the Gaussians, Σi represents the covariance matrices, Ci are the spherical harmonic coefficients, and αi are the opacities. Dif-ferentiable splatting applies a viewing transform W and Jacobian J to compute the transformed covariance Σ′ = JW ΣW T JT , enabling novel view rendering. Each pixel color C is obtained by blending points: 

C = X

> i∈P

ciαii−1Y

> j=1

(1 − αj ), (1) where O denotes overlapping points, ci and αi derived from the Gaussian with covariance Σ and optimized parameters. 

Material Point Method (MPM). The Material Point Method (MPM) algo-rithm synergistically combines the advantages of both Lagrangian and Eulerian frameworks by representing the continuum material as a collection of particles, denoted as PMPM = {(xp, vp, Fp)}, where each particle encapsulates a localized material volume. These particles carry intrinsic state variables, including posi-tion  xp, velocity  vp, and deformation gradient  Fp. The Lagrangian nature of the particles inherently guarantees mass conservation, whereas the auxiliary Eu-lerian background grid enables robust enforcement of momentum conservation. The interaction between particles and the grid is mediated through B-spline ker-nel functions, which facilitate accurate and smooth transfer of field quantities. Momentum conservation is enforced discretely in time: at each time step, particle momenta are mapped to the grid, grid velocities are updated according to the governing equations of motion, and the resulting velocities are then interpolated back to the particles to adjust their positions: 

xt+1  

> p

= xtp + ∆t vt+1  

> p

. (2) 6 X. Dong et al. 

The deformation gradient Fp is updated incrementally, with plasticity correc-tions, enabling realistic simulation of complex deformations and interactions in dynamic scenes. Details on MPM can be found in supplementary material. 

Planar-based Gaussian Splatting (PGSR). Optimizing vanilla 3D Gaus-sian models with only image reconstruction loss often results in local optima, complicating accurate geometry extraction, which is vital for the subsequent restoration stage. To avoid this, we adopt PGSR [4] for unbiased depth estima-tion. While vanilla 3DGS parameterizes the scene using volumetric Gaussians defined by mean μ and covariance Σ, this representation often leads to geo-metric ambiguity near surfaces. PGSR explicitly addresses this by enforcing a planar constraint Lflat = P || min( s)|| 1 on the scaling factors s, effectively com-pressing Gaussians into 2D surfels with normal ng aligned to the shortest axis. Furthermore, to resolve the bias in standard depth rendering—where the pro-jected centroid depth is used regardless of the viewing angle—PGSR calculates the exact intersection depth du between the viewing ray (origin o, direction d)and the Gaussian plane: 

du = (μg − o) · ng

d · ng

. (3) By accumulating these unbiased intersection depths du through α-blending, we obtain high-fidelity depth maps that precisely align with the physical surface, overcoming the fuzzy geometry inherent in vanilla 3DGS. 

3.2 Framework Overview 

As illustrated in Fig.1, our framework consists of four stages: First, we recon-struct the 3D scene from multi-view images using PGSR [4] together with seg-mentation maps generated by SAM 2 [32]. During reconstruction, each Gaussian is augmented with a segmentation-affinity feature learned under segmentation-map supervision to encode its semantic association. We then remove the user-selected objects, inpaint the resulting background holes using LaMa [34], and fine-tune the scene reconstruction to obtain a clean background scene. Second, we perform object extraction using generative 3D priors. Specifically, we lever-age SAM3D to recover complete object geometry from partial observations. By formulating multi-object decoupling as a decoupled object-generation problem, SAM3D enables the recovery of complete 3D shapes for individual objects that are originally coupled within the reconstructed scene. Third, we restore scene-consistent object states through object–scene alignment, which includes spa-tial alignment and mask-based appearance distillation (details in Secs. 3.3–3.4). These processes exploit metric cues and appearance cues from the reconstructed scene to refine the spatial placement and visual appearance of each object, ensur-ing consistency with the original scene context. Finally, the aligned objects are reinserted into the reconstructed scene and simulated using a modified Material Point Method (MPM) solver, enabling multi-object physical interactions. More implementation details are described in Sec. 3.5. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 7

3.3 Object-Scene Spatial Alignment Render-and-compare refinement with scene metric. To ensure that each separated object preserves accurate spatial placement for downstream physi-cal simulation, we propose the object-scene spatial alignment, which includes render-and-compare refinement with scene metric and physical constrained align-ment refinement. The render-and-compare refinement module iteratively opti-mizes each object’s pose ( i.e. , translation and rotation) by comparing rendered masked-object images with the corresponding ground-truth observations. Be-cause the initial pose may not fully align with the object in the original scene, we adopt SSIM and MS-SSIM as optimization objectives to progressively drive the object toward the correct image region. To further enhance optimization, we exploit metric cues from 3D reconstruc-tion ( e.g. , depth maps) to compute pointmaps, which provide SAM3D with more accurate 3D initialization. Specifically, given a depth map D ∈ RH×W ,camera intrinsics fx, f y , c x, c y , we obtain the pointmap P via pinhole-camera back-projection: 

P(v, u ) = 



XYZ

 =



(u − cx) · D(v, u )

fx

(v − cy ) · D(v, u )

fy

D(v, u )



(4) The resulting point map is an array of shape (H, W, 3) , where each pixel stores its 3D coordinate (X, Y, Z ) in the camera coordinate system. For pose refine-ment, we separately update translation and rotation. Following [3], this process is formulated as: 

tk+1  

> ∆

= arg min 

> tk+1
> ∆

Lt(GRender (tk+1  

> ∆

+ tk, O), I gt )+ arg min 

> Rk+1
> ∆

LR(GRender (Rk+1  

> ∆

⊙ (tk+1  

> ∆

+ tk), O), I gt ), (5) By minimizing the discrepancy between the rendered mask and the ground-truth image, we can progressively refine the object’s spatial placement, ensuring it aligns well with its original scene context. 

Physical constrained alignment refinement. Because SAM3D processes multiple objects independently and does not explicitly model inter-object spatial constraints, interpenetration may still remain after render-and-compare refine-ment. Motivated by [20], we therefore introduce a physics-constrained alignment refinement, which augments render-and-compare refinement with both scene-object and object-object physical constraints. Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 2, we use a pair of slippers as an example: the initial alignment exhibits severe in-terpenetration, which is physically implausible. We feed the image into a large multimodal model (Gemini 3 Pro) to infer a relation graph describing scene-object and object-object interactions. Based on this relation-control graph, we define two physical constraints: 8 X. Dong et al.  

> Fig. 2: Physics-constrained alignment refinement. A control graph is constructed to model object–object and scene–object relations, which guide spatial refinement and physically consistent final object placement.

1) object-scene relation constraint, which ensures the object maintains stable contact with the ground without floating or sinking. This can be written as: 

Los = 1

|S o|

X

> xi∈S o

h

max  0, n⊤xi + d − ϵ2 + max  0, −(n⊤xi + d) − ϵ2i

. (6) 2) object-object non-penetration constraint, which prevents interpenetration be-tween objects by enforcing a positive minimum distance between them. This process can be written as: 

Loo = X

> (a,b )∈E oo

h

max  0, m − dmin (Oa, Ob)i2

, (7) 

dmin (Oa, Ob) = min  

> x∈O a,y∈O b

∥x − y∥2. (8) After applying our physical-constrained refinement, the slippers are separated to a physically reasonable distance, eliminating interference during simulation. 

3.4 Mask-based Appearance Distillation 

Decoupled object-generation modeling can effectively address object incomplete-ness in 3D reconstruction caused by occlusions, and thus preserves accurate ge-ometry for separated objects. However, it does not reliably maintain appearance consistency. As shown in Fig.7, objects exhibit noticeable cartoon-like artifacts before appearance alignment. To address this, we introduce a mask-based ap-pearance distillation module. Specifically, for each view, we compute the overlap between the ground-truth mask and the rendered object mask, and apply a patch-level VGG feature loss [33] on the colors within this overlapping region. Owing to the property of 3DGS that local-region supervision can optimize par-ticle attributes over a broader spatial extent [17], this optimization does not produce hard boundaries across mask borders. Importantly, the optimizations from both spatial alignment and appearance distillation are introduced only as a post-processing step. It does not involve any training of the generative model, and therefore preserves the training-free property of our method. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 9 

> Fig. 3: Comparisons with the state of the arts. Our method ensures accurate decou-pling, alignment, and fidelity. Feature Splatting suffers from fragmentation due to poor background separation. DecoupledGaussian separates foregrounds but fails to disentan-gle individual objects.

3.5 Interactive Simulation 

After the restored objects are reintegrated into the scene, their dynamic in-teractions are simulated using a modified Material Point Method algorithm (MPM) [12]. MPM unifies the strengths of Lagrangian particle formulations and Eulerian grid formulations. Through the particle-to-grid (P2G) transfer, per-particle attributes are accumulated onto the background grid. The grid states (velocity and position) are then updated under mass conservation and momen-tum conservation. The updated states are mapped back to particles via grid-to-particle (G2P) transfer, completing the physical simulation step. More formu-lation details can be seen in supplementary material. Furthermore, we set the simulation steps in each frame to 300. For the interactive forces, users can define impulse force at point and force field, which support more flexible interactions. The interactive simulation can run on a consumer GPU (NVIDIA RTX 4090). 

# 4 Experiments 

In this section, we first present the experimental setup, including datasets, evalu-ation metrics, and baselines. We then compare our method with state-of-the-art approaches through rendered-frame visualizations, together with both qualita-tive and quantitative evaluations of spatial alignment and appearance alignment. We further provide ablation studies to validate the contribution of each module. Finally, we present applications of our framework to physical simulation and dynamic scene editing. 

4.1 Experimental Settings Datasets. For a fair and consistent comparison, we select two real-world static scenes from DecoupledGaussian [38]. The selected examples include the bear 10 X. Dong et al.   

> Fig. 4: Subfigure (a) shows the results of decoupled object recory. Subfigure (b) illus-trates the results of physical constrained optimization, where the object is well-aligned with the mask region and maintains a stable position without interpenetration.
> Table 1: Ablation studies on spatial alignment and appearance distillation. Results show that these two modules contribute to better quantitative performances. S.A. denotes spatial alignment, A.D. denotes appearance distillation.

Module Edge Error ↓ Module PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑

w/o S.A. 1.086 w/o A.D. 23.92 0.8693 Ours 1.075 Ours 30.04 0.9537 

and room scenes. Because real-world datasets with multi-object coupling are scarce, we additionally captured four multi-object coupled scenes (both indoor and outdoor) using a mobile phone. These data provide practical test cases for evaluating our method in realistic settings. Please refer to the supplementary material for more details. 

Metrics. To evaluate spatial alignment, we define edge error as the horizon-tal and vertical Sobel edge error between objects in rendered frames and their ground-truth images; lower edge error indicates more accurate object position-ing. To evaluate appearance alignment, we define appearance consistency using average PSNR and SSIM computed within the object-mask regions between ren-dered and ground-truth frames; better scores indicate closer visual fidelity. 

Baselines. We compare against methods that support interactive simulation in real-world scenes: 1) Feature Splatting [31], which assigns semantic category fea-tures to each Gaussian primitive to enable language-guided scene interaction; and 2) DecoupledGaussian [38], which assumes a planar foreground–background con-tact surface and uses Poisson Surface Reconstruction for foreground/background separation. Although O2Recon [14] and Amodal3R [41] also target occlusion-aware object separation, their performance on real-world scenes is poor; there-fore, they are excluded from our main comparisons. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 11  

> Fig. 5: With the pointmaps, generative model can achieve more accurate object ini-tialization, which helps better spatial alignment and stable physical simulation.

4.2 Comparison with the State of the Art Rendered videos. To validate the multi-object decoupling and appearance consistency for physical simulation, we show comparisons with Feature Splat-ting and DecoupledGaussian on the room example. As shown in Fig. 3, our method delivers more accurate object decoupling and restoration, with good spatial alignment and visual fidelity. In contrast, Feature Splatting often fails to separate objects from the background, leading to fragmented objects and scene structure. DecoupledGaussian can separate foreground from background, but cannot disentangle individual foreground objects ( e.g. , the slippers). 

Evaluating decoupled object recovery. The core idea of our method is to unify 3D generation and 3D reconstruction for real-world multi-object de-coupling. Accordingly, we evaluate the SAM3D-based image-to-3D module on multi-object separation in real scenes. As shown in Fig. 4(a), we compare geo-metric completeness after object separation against Feature Splatting and De-coupledGaussian. Our method separates multiple objects more completely while preserving accurate geometry from arbitrary viewpoints. For a cleaner abla-tion of module contributions, this experiment uses only the SAM3D component, without the mask-based appearance distillation module. 

4.3 Evaluating Multi-Object Spatial Alignment Render-and-compare refinement with scene metric. In Fig.5, we exploit metric cues from the 3D reconstruction ( i.e. , depth map) to compute pointmaps, 12 X. Dong et al.  

> Fig. 6: Two examples of render-and-compare refinement for spatial alignment. Each column shows the intermediate result at increasing optimization steps. (a) Example of mask-based alignment for the bear statue, where the rendered object progressively aligns with the observed mask region in the image. (b) Example of pose refinement for the ball object, where the object position gradually converges to the correct placement within the scene. As optimization proceeds, the rendered geometry becomes increas-ingly consistent with the mask constraint and the scene context, resulting in more accurate spatial alignment for downstream physical simulation.

which provide SAM3D with more accurate object initialization in 3D space. Furthermore, Fig.6 presents the bear in the bear scene and the ball in the outdoor scene. As optimization proceeds, the object masks align progressively better with the target regions, and object positions converge to the correct locations. Table 1 further shows that spatial alignment contributes to better edge error, indicating more accurate object pose. 

Physical constrained alignment refinement. To validate the effect of physical-constrained alignment refinement module, we assess whether it restores accurate object positions and physically plausible inter-object relations after spatial align-ment. As shown in Fig. 4(b), before refinement the two slippers exhibit clear in-terpenetration. This occurs because SAM3D processes multiple objects in a per-object manner and does not explicitly model inter-object spatial constraints. Thus, interpenetration can persist even after render-and-compare refinement. After applying our physical-constrained refinement, the slippers are separated to a physically reasonable distance, eliminating interference during simulation. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 13 

Fig. 7: Visualization of appearance alignment. The second row shows the object before alignment and the third row after alignment, demonstrating improved texture details and closer visual consistency with the in-scene object. 

Fig. 8: Visualization of the physical simulation and dynamic scene editing. Subfigure(a) shows physical simulation with “massgase gun"(object), while Subfigure(b) shows phys-ical simulation after removing “massgase gun". 

4.4 Evaluating Object-Scene Appearance Alignment 

To ensure that extracted objects are accurate not only in geometry and spatial placement but also in visual appearance, we introduce a mask-based appear-ance distillation module. As shown in Fig. 7, comparing results before and after appearance alignment demonstrates a clear improvement in visual realism and significantly stronger consistency with the original objects. Moreover, Table 1 14 X. Dong et al.  

> Fig. 9: Limitations caused by appearance variations (e.g., specular highlights and shad-ows) and less-informative contextual cues.

show that without appearance distillation, the PSNR and SSIM metrics degrade significantly, indicating a substantial drop in visual fidelity. 

Applications. As demonstrated above, our method achieves high-quality multi-object spatial and appearance alignment. Coupled with Material Point Method (MPM) simulation, it can yield physically realistic and stable dynamics. More-over, accurate geometry recovery and alignment also enable convenient dynamic scene editing ( e.g. , object removal/modification, as shown in Fig. 8). The result-ing videos support downstream tasks like interactive video generation, offering precise control over interactions and visual edits. 

# 5 Conclusion 

This work presents SAM3D-Phys, a training-free framework for interactive phys-ical simulation in reconstructed real-world scenes. The proposed method inte-grates scene reconstruction with the generative 3D priors of SAM3D to recover complete object geometry from partial observations. By restoring both the ge-ometry and appearance of objects within reconstructed environments, the frame-work enables physically plausible interactions among multiple objects in a scene. To ensure consistency with the observed environment, we introduce a physics-constrained object–scene alignment strategy for pose and placement recovery, together with a mask-guided appearance distillation module for refining object textures based on image observations. Experimental results on real-world scenes demonstrate that the proposed approach effectively recovers object geometry and supports stable multi-object interactions while maintaining consistency with the reconstructed environment. The framework runs efficiently on consumer-grade hardware and provides a practical solution for enabling physically grounded in-teractions in reconstructed real-world scenes. 

Limitations. Appearance inconsistencies caused by illumination variations, such as specular highlights and shadow changes, remain challenging in scene-centric reconstruction and inpainting, as shown in Fig.9(a). In addition, many scene completion approaches rely on contextual cues, and performance may degrade when the environment provides limited visual context, as shown in Fig.9(b). Addressing these challenges remains an important direction for future research. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 15 

# References 

1. Bruce, J., Dennis, M.D., Edwards, A., Parker-Holder, J., Shi, Y., Hughes, E., Lai, M., Mavalankar, A., Steigerwald, R., Apps, C., et al.: Genie: Generative interactive environments. In: ICML (2024) 2. Cai, D., Heikkilä, J., Rahtu, E.: Gs-pose: Generalizable segmentation-based 6d object pose estimation with 3d gaussian splatting (2024) 3. Cao, T., Luo, F., Qin, J., Jiang, Y., Wang, Y., Xiao, C.: ig-6dof: Model-free 6dof pose estimation for unseen object via iterative 3d gaussian splatting. In: CVPR. pp. 6436–6446 (2025) 4. Chen, D., Li, H., Ye, W., Wang, Y., Xie, W., Zhai, S., Wang, N., Liu, H., Bao, H., Zhang, G.: Pgsr: Planar-based gaussian splatting for efficient and high-fidelity surface reconstruction. IEEE TVCG 31 , 6100–6111 (2024) 5. Chen, X., Chu, F.J., Gleize, P., Liang, K.J., Sax, A., Tang, H., Wang, W., Guo, M., Hardin, T., Li, X., et al.: Sam 3d: 3dfy anything in images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16624 (2025) 6. Deng, W., Campbell, D., Sun, C., Zhang, J., Kanitkar, S., Shaffer, M.E., Gould, S.: Pos3r: 6d pose estimation for unseen objects made easy. In: CVPR. pp. 16818– 16828 (2025) 7. Feng, J., Li, X., Lin, J., Liu, J., Liu, G., Lou, W., Ma, S., Shi, G., Wang, Q., Wang, J., et al.: Seed3d 1.0: From images to high-fidelity simulation-ready 3d assets (2025) 8. Geng, D., Herrmann, C., Hur, J., Cole, F., Zhang, S., Pfaff, T., Lopez-Guevara, T., Aytar, Y., Rubinstein, M., Sun, C., et al.: Motion prompting: Controlling video generation with motion trajectories. In: CVPR. pp. 1–12 (2025) 9. Guo, Y., Yang, C., Rao, A., Liang, Z., Wang, Y., Qiao, Y., Agrawala, M., Lin, D., Dai, B.: Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725 (2023) 10. Hong, Y., Zhang, K., Gu, J., Bi, S., Zhou, Y., Liu, D., Liu, F., Sunkavalli, K., Bui, T., Tan, H.: Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04400 (2023) 11. Hu, J., Guo, J., Cen, J., Yang, C., Li, S., Shen, W.: Worldact: Activating monolithic 3d worlds into interactive-ready object-centric scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15843 (2026) 12. Hu, Y., Fang, Y., Ge, Z., Qu, Z., Zhu, Y., Pradhana, A., Jiang, C.: A moving least squares material point method with displacement discontinuity and two-way rigid body coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37 (4), 1–14 (2018) 13. Hu, Y., Ye, S., Zhao, W., Lin, M., He, Y., Wen, Y.H., He, Y., Liu, Y.J.: Oˆ 2-recon: Completing 3d reconstruction of occluded objects in the scene with a pre-trained 2d diffusion model. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 38, pp. 2285–2293 (2024) 14. Hu, Y., Ye, S., Zhao, W., Lin, M., He, Y., Wen, Y.H., He, Y., Liu, Y.J.: O2-recon: completing 3d reconstruction of occluded objects in the scene with a pre-trained 2d diffusion model. In: AAAI. vol. 38, pp. 2285–2293 (2024) 15. Huang, T., Zhang, H., Zeng, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, H., Zuo, W., Lau, R.W.: Dream-physics: Learning physics-based 3d dynamics with video diffusion priors. In: Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 39, pp. 3733–3741 (2025) 16. Jiang, Y., Yu, C., Xie, T., Li, X., Feng, Y., Wang, H., Li, M., Lau, H., Gao, F., Yang, Y., et al.: Vr-gs: A physical dynamics-aware interactive gaussian splatting system in virtual reality. In: ACM SIGGRAPH. pp. 1–1 (2024) 16 X. Dong et al. 17. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM TOG 42 (4), 139–1 (2023) 18. Kruzliak, A., Hartvich, J., Patni, S.P., Rustler, L., Behrens, J.K., Abu-Dakka, F.J., Mikolajczyk, K., Kyrki, V., Hoffmann, M.: Interactive learning of physical object properties through robot manipulation and database of object measurements. In: IROS. pp. 7596–7603 (2024) 19. Labbé, Y., Manuelli, L., Mousavian, A., Tyree, S., Birchfield, S., Tremblay, J., Carpentier, J., Aubry, M., Fox, D., Sivic, J.: Megapose: 6d pose estimation of novel objects via render & compare. In: CoRL (2022) 20. Li, A., Liu, J., Zhu, Y., Tang, Y.: Scorehoi: Physically plausible reconstruc-tion of human-object interaction via score-guided diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07920 (2025) 21. Li, X., Qiao, Y.L., Chen, P.Y., Jatavallabhula, K.M., Lin, M., Jiang, C., Gan, C.: Pac-nerf: Physics augmented continuum neural radiance fields for geometry-agnostic system identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05512 (2023) 22. Li, Z., Tucker, R., Snavely, N., Holynski, A.: Generative image dynamics. In: CVPR. pp. 24142–24153 (2024) 23. Lin, Y., Lin, C., Xu, J., Mu, Y.: Omniphysgs: 3d constitutive gaussians for general physics-based dynamics generation. ICLR (2025) 24. Liu, F., Wang, H., Yao, S., Zhang, S., Zhou, J., Duan, Y.: Physics3d: Learning phys-ical properties of 3d gaussians via video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04338 (2024) 25. Liu, S., Ren, Z., Gupta, S., Wang, S.: Physgen: Rigid-body physics-grounded image-to-video generation. In: ECCV. pp. 360–378 (2024) 26. Liu, Z., Ye, W., Luximon, Y., Wan, P., Zhang, D.: Unleashing the potential of multi-modal foundation models and video diffusion for 4d dynamic physical scene simulation. In: CVPR. pp. 11016–11025 (2025) 27. Lou, H., Liu, Y., Pan, Y., Geng, Y., Chen, J., Ma, W., Li, C., Wang, L., Feng, H., Shi, L., et al.: Robo-gs: A physics consistent spatial-temporal model for robotic arm with hybrid representation. In: ICRA. pp. 15379–15386 (2025) 28. Lu, G., Zhang, S., Wang, Z., Liu, C., Lu, J., Tang, Y.: Manigaussian: Dynamic gaussian splatting for multi-task robotic manipulation. In: ECCV. pp. 349–366 (2024) 29. Mao, H., Xu, Z., Wei, S., Quan, Y., Deng, N., Yang, X.: Live-gs: Llm powers interactive vr by enhancing gaussian splatting. In: IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW). pp. 1234–1235 (2025) 30. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. CACM 

65 (1), 99–106 (2021) 31. Qiu, R.Z., Yang, G., Zeng, W., Wang, X.: Feature splatting: Language-driven physics-based scene synthesis and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01223 (2024) 32. Ravi, N., Gabeur, V., Hu, Y.T., Hu, R., Ryali, C., Ma, T., Khedr, H., Rädle, R., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., et al.: Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024) 33. Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014) 34. Suvorov, R., Logacheva, E., Mashikhin, A., Remizova, A., Ashukha, A., Silvestrov, A., Kong, N., Goka, H., Park, K., Lempitsky, V.: Resolution-robust large mask inpainting with fourier convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07161 (2021) SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 17 35. Tang, J., Chen, Z., Chen, X., Wang, T., Zeng, G., Liu, Z.: Lgm: Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05054 (2024) 36. Team, T.H.: Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffusion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation (2025) 37. Wang, C., Chen, C., Huang, Y., Dou, Z., Liu, Y., Gu, J., Liu, L.: Physctrl: Genera-tive physics for controllable and physics-grounded video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20358 (2025) 38. Wang, M., Zhang, Y., Xu, W., Ma, R., Zou, C., Morris, D.: Decoupledgaussian: Object-scene decoupling for physics-based interaction. In: CVPR. pp. 11361–11372 (2025) 39. Wu, T., Zheng, C., Guan, F., Vedaldi, A., Cham, T.J.: Amodal3r: Amodal 3d reconstruction from occluded 2d images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13439 (2025) 40. Wu, T., Zheng, C., Guan, F., Vedaldi, A., Cham, T.J.: Amodal3r: Amodal 3d reconstruction from occluded 2d images (2025) 41. Wu, T., Zheng, C., Guan, F., Vedaldi, A., Cham, T.J.: Amodal3r: Amodal 3d reconstruction from occluded 2d images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13439 (2025) 42. Xia, H., Lin, C.H., Hsu, H.Y., Leboutet, Q., Gao, K., Paulitsch, M., Ummenhofer, B., Wang, S.: Holoscene: Simulation-ready interactive 3d worlds from a single video. NeurIPS 38 , 32501–32524 (2026) 43. Xiang, J., Lv, Z., Xu, S., Deng, Y., Wang, R., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Tong, X., Yang, J.: Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506 (2024) 44. Xiang, J., Lv, Z., Xu, S., Deng, Y., Wang, R., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Tong, X., Yang, J.: Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 21469–21480 (2025) 45. Xie, T., Zong, Z., Qiu, Y., et al.: Physgaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynamics. In: CVPR. pp. 4389–4398 (2024) 46. Yang, Z., Wang, J., Tang, Y., Chen, K., Zhao, H., Torr, P.H.: Lavt: Language-aware vision transformer for referring image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the CVPR. pp. 18155–18165 (2022) 47. Yu, H.X., Duan, H., Herrmann, C., Freeman, W.T., Wu, J.: Wonderworld: Inter-active 3d scene generation from a single image. In: CVPR. pp. 5916–5926 (2025) 48. Zhang, T., Yu, H.X., Wu, R., et al.: Physdreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects via video generation. In: ECCV. pp. 388–406 (2024) 49. Zhang, X., Chen, Y., Fang, Y., Qu, W., Huang, H., Zhang, C., Xu, F., Li, X.: Telephysics: Physics-grounded multi-object scene generation from a single image with real-time interaction (2026), https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20290 18 X. Dong et al. 

# Supplementary Material 

# A Zoomed-in Comparisons with Baselines 

To better highlight the differences between our method and the baseline in phys-ical simulation, we provide zoomed-in views of the motion regions in the supple-mentary material, in addition to the standard-scale comparisons shown in the main manuscript. This allows readers to more clearly observe the object dynam-ics. As shown in Fig. 10, in the Room scene, the target motion is to separate the two slippers, throw them up, and let them fall back naturally. Feature Splat-ting [31] exhibits two evident shortcomings: first, it fails to separate the two slippers; second, after the slippers leave the ground, noticeable damage appears on both the back surfaces of the slippers and the scene. In contrast, our method accurately separates the two slippers while preserving the integrity of both the objects and the scene, and the resulting motions remain physically plausible. In the Outdoor scene, the target motion is to gently throw up the yellow baseball upward while applying a forward external force to the pink speaker, causing it to roll. Because Feature Splatting relies on natural language for object localization and segmentation, it struggles to handle multiple objects simultane-ously, leading to obvious tearing and blur artifacts in the scene. Similarly, in the Flower Bed scene, the target motion is for the massage hammer on the left and the massage gun on the right to fall from the air. Feature Splatting again pro-duces severe tearing and blur artifacts. By contrast, our method can accurately separate multiple objects in both scenes while preserving geometric structure, appearance consistency, and spatial alignment, and the simulated motions also conform well to physical laws. 

# B Dataset Scenes 

We use two real-world scenes from DecoupledGaussian [38], including the bear and room scenes. Since real-world datasets featuring multi-object coupling are scarce, we additionally captured four multi-object coupled scenes using a mobile phone. The videos were originally recorded at a resolution of 3840 × 2160 pixels. For our experiments, we use videos downsampled by a factor of 2, resulting in a resolution of 1920 × 1080 pixels, which improves computational efficiency without compromising the validity of the evaluation. We note that our method can potentially achieve even better performance at the original resolution. As shown in Fig. 11, these six scenes provide practical test cases for evaluating our method in realistic settings. The details of the six scenes are described below. 

Bear This scene, sourced from DecoupledGaussian [38], depicts a stone bear statue standing on a green lawn. 

Room Drawn from both Mip-Nerf 360 [30] and DecoupledGaussian [38], this scene captures a residential living room interior, featuring a pair of slippers resting on the carpet. SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 19 Throw up these slippers         

> Ours: slippers are decoupled and well simulated (zoomed-in results)
> Feature Splatting ：coupled objects and broken scene (zoomed-in results)
> Throw up the objects
> Ours: object are well simulated (zoomed-in results)
> Feature Splatting ：broken objects (zoomed-in results)
> The objects falling down
> Ours: Object are decoupled (zoomed-in results)
> Feature Splatting ：objects cannot be accurately extracted (zoomed-in results)

Fig. 10: Zoomed-in comparisons with baselines. Unlike baseline approaches dependent on natural language for localization and segmentation, which fail in multi-object sce-narios and suffer from severe tearing and blur, our method utilizes generative priors to resolve object separation gaps in 3D reconstruction. By jointly exploiting metric cues and appearance information from the reconstruction process, our method guarantees accurate spatial alignment and visual fidelity, ultimately enabling the generation of physically reasonable motion. 20 X. Dong et al.  

> Fig. 11: Dataset scenes used in our experiments. These six real-world multi-object scenes exhibit object coupling effects, such as mutual occlusions, making them suited for evaluating the effectiveness of our method in object separation, spatial alignment, and appearance alignment.

Outdoor This scene presents an outdoor park setting, where various objects, including a massage gun and a pink speaker, are arranged on the ground. 

Flower Bed This scene shows a flower bed, with a bench in the foreground holding several items, such as a massage hammer and a U-shaped pillow. 

Billiard Table This scene features a billiard table surface cluttered with multiple objects, including a massage gun and a pink speaker. 

Dorm This scene illustrates a corner of a dormitory room, highlighting a desktop scattered with various items, notably including a baseball. 

# C User Study and LMM-as-Judge Evaluation 

User Study. To better evaluate whether our method produces more realistic rendered videos, we conducted a user study. Specifically, we invited 12 par-ticipants and showed each of them the rendered videos generated by different methods across all scenes. For each scene, we provided the intended motion de-scription. For example, in the Room scene, the target motion is to throw a pair of slippers into the air and let them fall back separately. Participants were asked to score each result from two perspectives: motion realism and visual quality. Motion realism measures whether the object trajectories are physically plausi-ble and consistent with the target motion description. Visual quality evaluates whether objects are accurately separated from one another and from the back-ground scene, whether noticeable tearing or blur appears near object boundaries, and whether the overall motion sequence suffers from artifacts such as motion SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 21                  

> Table 2: User study and LMM-as-Judge evaluation results. Our method outperforms the baselines in both motion realism and visual quality, demonstrating its effectiveness in generating physically plausible motions while maintaining high visual fidelity.
> Motion Realism User Study LMM-as-Judge Eval.
> Feature Splatting [31] 16 10 DecoupledGaussian [38] 28 20 Ours 41 43 Visual Quality User Study LMM-as-Judge Eval.
> Feature Splatting [31] 15 15 DecoupledGaussian [38] 37 20 Ours 42 33

distortion, structural deformation, or loss of sharpness. Each criterion was scored out of 50 points, yielding a total score of 100. As shown in Table 2, Feature Splatting [31], which relies on natural-language-guided object localization and segmentation, struggles to handle multiple objects simultaneously and therefore produces evident tearing and blur artifacts. Decou-pledGaussian [38] can separate foreground from background, but it is unable to disentangle multiple interacting objects and is mainly effective when the contact surface is planar, resulting in a clear performance drop in more complex scenes. In contrast, our method leverages generative priors to address incomplete object separation in reconstruction, while spatial alignment and appearance distillation ensure visual fidelity and physical plausibility. As a result, our method signifi-cantly outperforms the baselines in both motion realism and visual quality. 

LMM-as-Judge Evaluation. Large Multimodal Model (LMM) has recently emerged as a powerful tool for assessing the quality of rendered videos. To further validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conducted an LMM-as-Judge evaluation. Specifically, we employed Gemini 3.1 Pro as the judge model, adhering to the same evaluation criteria used in our user study. Each video was uniformly sampled into 16 frames. These frames were then horizontally con-catenated into a single composite image, with sequential indices annotated in the top-left corner of each frame to explicitly preserve temporal order for the model. This composite image was subsequently fed into the LMM for scoring. As illustrated in Table 2, the objective LMM-as-Judge evaluation demonstrates that our method significantly outperforms both Feature Splatting and Decou-pledGaussian. Notably, the results output from the LMM align closely with human judgments, further validating the effectiveness of our approach. 22 X. Dong et al. 

# D Approach Details 

Physical constrained alignment refinement. Due to space constraints in the main text, the detailed formulation of our physically constrained alignment refinement is provided in the supplementary material, corresponding to Equa-tions (6)(7)(8). Specifically, Equation (6) guarantees stable ground contact by preventing both floating and interpenetration, where xi denotes a point within the bottom surface point set So, n represents the ground plane normal (defining the plane as n⊤xi + d), and ϵ is a small predefined tolerance, such that the first term constrains the object from hovering above the ground while the second term prevents it from sinking below the surface. To prevent interpenetration between objects, Equation (7) enforces the min-imum distance between them to be greater than a small predefined tolerance 

ϵ (which can defined as zero in formulation). Oa and Ob denote two objects. The minimum distance between them is computed using Equation (8) and con-strained to be greater than m, thereby ensuring that the objects do not overlap. 

# E Details of Material Point Method 

After the restored objects are reintegrated into the scene, we followed PhysGaus-sian [45] and DreamPhysics [15] to simulate dynamics via the Material Point Method algorithm (MPM) [12]. The material point method algorithm synergis-tically combines the advantages of both Lagrangian and Eulerian frameworks by representing the continuum material as a collection of particles. Through the particle-to-grid (P2G) transfer, per-particle attributes are accumulated onto the background grid. The grid states (velocity and position) are then updated under mass conservation and momentum conservation. The updated states are mapped back to particles via grid-to-particle (G2P) transfer, completing the physical simulation step. Following Dreamphysics, we summarize the MPM pro-cess in Algorithm 1. Our implementation of MPM simulation is based on NVIDIA’s Warp library, which builds upon the open-source code of PhysGaussian and DecoupledGaus-sian [38] to support multi-object physical simulation. 

# F Discussion on Closely Related Works 

We draw comparisons with three closely related works: Holoscene [42], Worl-dAct [11], and TelePhysics [49]. Unlike HoloScene [42], our method naturally supports both indoor and outdoor scenes and achieves higher efficiency through training-free layout recovery, eliminating the need for costly simulation-based optimization. Furthermore, we ensure superior visual consistency via holistic re-construction with SAM3D priors, as opposed to mask-based object separation (see Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 in the main paper, Fig. 10 and Table 2 in the supplementary material). Compared to WorldAct [11], our approach places greater emphasis SAM3D-Phys: Towards Multi-Object Interactive Simulation in Real World 23 

Algorithm 1 MPM Process 

Input: s0 

> p

(position), mp (mass), h0 

> p

(velocity) 

Input: F0 

> p

(deformation gradient), B0 

> p

(velocity field gradient) 

1: for n = 0 to N − 1 do 

2: for all particles p do ▷ Particle-to-grid (P2G) transfer 

3: mni ← P 

> p

bnip mp ▷ i denotes the grid index 

4: mni hni ← P 

> p

bnip mp

 hnp + Bnp (si − snp )

5: end for 

6: hn+1  

> i

← hni − ∆t mni

P 

> p

τ np ∇bnip V 0 

> p

+ ∆t g ▷ Grid update 

7: for all particles p do ▷ Grid-to-particle (G2P) transfer 

8: hn+1  

> p

← P 

> i

hn+1  

> i

bnip 

9: sn+1  

> p

← snp + ∆t hn+1  

> p

▷ ∆t is the time step 

10: Bn+1  

> p

← 4(∆s )2

P 

> i

bnip hn+1  

> i

(si − snp )⊤

11: Fn+1  

> p

←  I + ∆t Bn+1 

> p

Fnp

12: end for 

13: end for 

on maintaining accurate spatial layouts between objects and their surround-ing scenes. In contrast, WorldAct often suffers from physical interpenetration among objects and between objects and the scene. Additionally, while WorldAct is evaluated solely on generated data, which fails to demonstrate its effectiveness in real-world scenarios. Finally, regarding TelePhysics [49], our problem setting differs significantly. It relies on single-image generation and physical simulation, which often results in insufficient realism and restricts large-scale background movement.