Title: UniCAD: A Unified Benchmark and Universal Model for Multi-Modal Multi-Task CAD

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05058v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 01:39:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# UniCAD: A Unified Benchmark and Universal Model for Multi-Modal Multi-Task CAD 

# Jingyuan Chen * Sheng Jin * Haopeng Sun Wentao Liu Chen Qian SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 

# {chenjingyuan, jinsheng, sunhaopeng, liuwentao, qianchen }@tetras.ai 

# Abstract 

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) underpins modern engi-neering and manufacturing by enabling the creation of pre-cise, editable 3D models. However, CAD research typi-cally studies tasks in isolation, and multi-modal, multi-task learning for CAD is hindered by the absence of a unified benchmark. To address this gap, we introduce UniCAD, a comprehensive benchmark for multi-modal CAD learn-ing that covers point-to-CAD reconstruction, text/image-to-CAD generation, and CAD question answering across diverse input modalities. Alongside the benchmark, we present UniCAD-MLLM, a universal multi-modal large lan-guage model that ingests text, images, sketches, and point clouds and performs these heterogeneous tasks in an end-to-end fashion within a single framework. Extensive exper-iments on the UniCAD and Fusion360 benchmarks demon-strate that UniCAD-MLLM achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance across all tasks, outperforming existing task-specific and multi-task baselines. We will release the dataset, code, and pretrained models to accelerate future research. 

# 1. Introduction 

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) enables the creation, mod-ification, analysis, and optimization of precise, parametric 3D models and is central to modern engineering and man-ufacturing workflows [31]. CAD representations support iterative design, downstream fabrication, and collaborative workflows, but building CAD models still requires domain expertise and significant manual effort. Recent work aims to lower this barrier by automating CAD generation and manipulation from alternative inputs ( e.g ., text, images or sketches). Yet, most methods target a single input modal-ity or a single downstream task (reconstruction, generation, or understanding), which limits cross-task knowledge trans-fer and practical usefulness in real-world design-assistance scenarios where users naturally provide mixed inputs. 

> *Equal contribution.

A major practical obstacle to unified CAD learning is the lack of a shared, large-scale benchmark that brings to-gether multiple input modalities and diverse tasks under a single, standardized evaluation protocol. Existing datasets and evaluation pipelines typically focus on either a single modality (point clouds, multi-view images, or text) or a sin-gle downstream task ( e.g ., reconstruction, generation, or un-derstanding), making it difficult to compare methods fairly or to develop models that robustly generalize across tasks. To address this gap, we introduce UniCAD, a uni-fied benchmark for multi-modal, multi-task CAD learn-ing. UniCAD consolidates and standardizes paired CAD data across text, images, sketches, and point clouds, and defines evaluation protocols and task-specific metrics for several practical tasks: text →CAD, image/sketch →CAD, point-cloud →CAD and CAD QA. By exposing models to heterogeneous modalities and tasks within a single frame-work, UniCAD encourages the development of systems that learn shared geometric and semantic representations, im-proves data efficiency via cross-task supervision, and better reflects realistic design scenarios in which users combine sketches, descriptions, and scans. Complementing the benchmark, we propose UniCAD-MLLM, a multimodal large language model that unifies these tasks. Designing a universal CAD model poses sev-eral technical challenges. The input modalities encode com-plementary but different information: sparse spatial sam-ples in point clouds, dense visual cues in images, and high-level intent in language. Fusing these signals while retain-ing task-specific detail requires careful encoder design and a robust shared latent. The outputs are also heterogeneous. CAD generation demands precise, executable CAD repre-sentations, while CAD understanding ( i.e . question answer-ing) requires structured retrieval and reasoning over para-metric model elements. UniCAD-MLLM uses modality-specific encoders to ingest text, images/sketches, and point clouds, projects them into a shared geometric–semantic la-tent, and tackles CAD generation and understanding in a unified manner. A key design decision in our pipeline is to produce CAD outputs as executable, editable Python scripts 1

> arXiv:2606.05058v1 [cs.CV] 3 Jun 2026 Figure 1. UniCAD unifies (a) point-cloud to CAD reconstruction, (b) image/sketch to CAD generation, (c) text to CAD generation and (d) CAD QA, enabling shared geometric–semantic reasoning across heterogeneous inputs and tasks.

(rather than commonly used command sequences or only fi-nal B-Rep meshes). This representation has several practi-cal advantages: (1) it is directly interpretable and editable by humans, (2) it can be executed and validated program-matically to check for syntactic and semantic correctness, and (3) it integrates naturally with popular CAD toolchains (e.g ., CadQuery [5] workflows), making downstream refine-ment and deployment more straightforward. We evaluate UniCAD-MLLM extensively on the Uni-CAD benchmark against a suite of task-specific and multi-task baselines. Results demonstrate that a unified, multi-task model trained on diverse modalities can outperform specialized systems across generation and understanding. In summary, our contributions are threefold: • We introduce UniCAD, the first large-scale unified benchmark for multi-modal, multi-task CAD learn-ing, providing standardized data, splits, and evaluation protocols for text →CAD, image/sketch →CAD, point-cloud →CAD, and CAD question answering. • We present UniCAD-MLLM, a single end-to-end model that jointly processes text, images/sketches, and point clouds, and unifies CAD generation and understanding within a shared geometric–semantic latent space. • We demonstrate that joint multi-modal, multi-task learn-ing consistently outperforms specialized per-task base-lines, validating the effectiveness and scalability of uni-fied CAD modeling. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Representations for CAD 

Existing methods for CAD generation can be broadly cat-egorized based on model representations: boundary repre-sentation (B-rep), command sequence, and CAD program representations. 

2.1.1. Boundary Representation (B-rep) 

A B-rep model describes a solid object using a graph struc-ture that encodes both geometric primitives ( e.g ., paramet-ric curves and surfaces) and topological entities ( e.g ., ver-tices, edges, and faces) that together define the model’s boundary [4]. Prior work has explored B-rep generation through different strategies. Early methods relied on pre-defined template curves or surfaces [22, 33, 34, 40, 43], while PolyGen [28] represented a special case of B-rep us-ing planar n-gon meshes generated via pointer networks and Transformers [39]. More recent methods, such as Brep-Gen [52], directly synthesize complete B-rep models, em-ploying diffusion-based denoising across faces, edges, and vertices. Although B-rep captures geometric boundaries with high fidelity and serves as the standard format for downstream CAD evaluation, ensuring topological valid-ity ( e.g ., avoiding self-intersections, gaps, or overlaps) in-troduces significant modeling complexity. Moreover, B-rep structures are less intuitive for editing and constraint-based reasoning, limiting their applicability in interactive or multi-modal pipelines. 22.1.2. Command Sequence Representation 

The availability of large-scale parametric CAD datasets [44, 46] has catalyzed research on modeling construction com-mand sequences, which capture the procedural history of how a CAD model is built. Each command ( e.g ., sketch, extrude) encodes parametric and geometric con-straints, making this representation both compact and in-terpretable. Learning-based approaches leverage command histories [44, 46, 50, 51] and sketch constraints [32] to generate editable parametric solids that can be replayed through a modeling kernel to reconstruct the CAD file. While command-sequence approaches are compelling for their compactness, they are often less expressive for higher-level control structures and may be harder to integrate di-rectly with existing CAD scripting ecosystems. 

2.1.3. CAD Program Representation 

An alternative line of work represents CAD models as exe-cutable programs, typically written in Python-based frame-works such as CadQuery [5]. This representation offers sev-eral distinct advantages: it is interpretable, editable, and ex-ecutable, enabling automatic validation, constraint check-ing, and integration with human-in-the-loop design work-flows. Recent studies [30, 48] have shown that mapping CAD sequences to structured Python scripts can improve both fidelity and generalization, while aligning naturally with modern code-oriented LLMs. In this paradigm, CAD generation becomes a form of code generation, where large vision–language models (VLMs) [41, 53] can provide pow-erful cross-modal reasoning. Our approach follows this di-rection by generating CAD models as executable Python scripts that unify multiple input modalities within a single framework. Rather than claiming programmatic representa-tions universally outperform other forms, we argue that they are particularly well-suited for multi-task and multi-modal CAD pipelines, where interpretability, editability, and vali-dation are critical for research and industrial applications. 

2.2. CAD Tasks and Benchmarks 

Learning-based CAD research encompasses several key tasks, conditional CAD generation, and CAD question an-swering (QA), that together aim to endow models with multimodal understanding and controllable design capa-bilities. However, progress in these tasks has been con-strained by fragmented datasets and inconsistent represen-tations. Existing CAD benchmarks (Table 1) differ in their representations (B-rep, command sequence, or program-matic code), conditioning modalities (text, image, sketch, or point cloud), and supported tasks, making fair compari-son difficult and hindering unified model development. In contrast, UniCAD provides a unified, large-scale, and mul-timodal benchmark that supports CAD generation and QA tasks jointly, paving the way toward general-purpose CAD understanding and reasoning models. 

CAD Generation focuses on synthesizing parametric 3D models that adhere to constraints specified by inputs such as point clouds, images, or text. DeepCAD [46] intro-duced a foundational approach by learning a latent space of CAD command sequences in an unconditional setting, but lacks support for conditional generation. Subsequent meth-ods enable conditioning on individual modalities, including point clouds [11, 38], images [2, 8, 54], sketches [20, 21], and text [6, 16]. Despite continued progress, these ap-proaches are largely modality-specific and rely on disjoint datasets, limiting cross-modal generalization. In contrast, multimodal CAD generation has been comparatively under-explored. Early efforts such as CAD-GPT [42] combine im-age and text inputs, but still lag behind specialized single-modality systems in reconstruction fidelity and controllabil-ity. A concurrent work, Cadrille [18], also investigates mul-timodal CAD reconstruction, further highlighting growing interest in unified multimodal CAD modeling. 

CAD Question Answering (CAD QA) aims to as-sess a model’s ability to reason about geometric structure and procedural design logic, including tasks such as con-straint identification, feature counting and parameter re-trieval. While large-scale 3D QA benchmarks exist for meshes and point clouds, QA over parametric CAD rep-resentations remains notably underdeveloped. Among the limited efforts, SGP-Bench [29] evaluates a custom CAD domain-specific language for 2D/3D shapes. 

2.3. Large Multimodal Models on CAD 

Recent advances in Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [1, 7, 24, 41] have inspired their application to parametric CAD modeling. Recent works increasingly leverage pretrained LMM architectures for cross-modal reasoning and design synthesis. Img2CAD [54] employs a vision–language model to infer global discrete structures from images before predicting fine-grained attributes, while Text2CAD [16] leverages LMMs for auto-regressive CAD sequence gen-eration. CAD-MLLM [49] further explore multimodal alignment between textual, visual, and geometric modal-ities for CAD understanding and synthesis. In parallel, LMM-driven agentic systems such as CAD-Assistant [27], CADCodeVerify [3], and Seek-CAD [23] focus on gener-ating or refining executable CAD programs by prompting off-the-shelf LMMs ( e.g . GPT-4o [14] and Gemini [37]). These approaches highlight the potential of LMMs for pro-cedural CAD generation, yet they predominantly rely on generic foundation models without dedicated design for scalable, structured multimodal CAD reasoning. In con-trast, UniCAD-MLLM advances this frontier by unifying three modalities within a shared framework for controllable CAD generation and understanding. 3Table 1. Overview of 3D CAD Datasets by CAD Representation, Model Size, Input Modality and Supported Task. * 3D shapes may include B-rep, Mesh or point clouds. Our proposed UniCAD dataset is the only dataset available that simultaneously supports multi-view images, text, and point cloud conditioned data for CAD reconstruction, generation and understanding.                                                                                                                                                                                      

> Dataset Year Representation Dataset Size Input Modality Task 3D Shapes ∗Text Image Sketch Recon. Gen. Und. ABC [17] 2019 B-rep ∼1,000,000 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> CC3D-Ops [10] 2022 B-rep ∼37,000 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> DeepCAD [46] 2021 Command Sequence 179,133 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> Fusion360 [44] 2021 Command Sequence 8,625 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> CADParser [57] 2023 Command Sequence ∼40,000 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> CAD-Recode [30] 2024 CAD Programs ∼1,000,000 ✓✗✗✗✓✗✗
> Text2CAD [16] 2024 Command Sequence ∼158,000 ✗✓✗✗✗✓✗
> Query2CAD [6] 2024 CAD Programs 57 ✗✓✗✗✗✓✗
> Text2CADQuery [48] 2025 CAD Programs ∼170,000 ✗✓✗✗✗✓✗
> Img2CAD [54] 2024 Command Sequence 4,574 ✗✗✓✗✗✓✗
> ABC-mono [9] 2024 Command Sequence 208,853 ✗✗✓✓✗✓✗
> OpenECAD [55] 2024 Command Sequence ∼200,000 ✗✗✓✗✗✓✗
> Free2CAD [21] 2022 Command Sequence ∼210,000 ✗✗✗✓✗✓✗
> SGP-Bench [29] 2025 Command Sequence 2,400 ✗✗✓✗✗✗✓
> OmniCAD [49] 2024 Command Sequence 453,220 ✓✓✓✗✓✓✗
> LLM4CAD [35] 2025 CAD Programs ∼5000 ✗✓✓✓✗✓✗
> UniCAD (Ours) 2025 CAD Programs 1,448,150 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓

# 3. Creation of UniCAD Dataset 

Existing CAD datasets predominantly focus on either geo-metric representations or modeling sequences, rarely pro-viding aligned multi-modal signals or supporting multi-task learning. The ABC dataset [17] offers over one million CAD models but is limited to B-rep geometry and lacks modeling histories. Fusion360 Reconstruction [44] pro-vides human-authored construction sequences but is con-strained in scale, comprising only 8,625 designs. Other datasets, such as DeepCAD [46], Text2CAD [16], and CAD-Recode [30], include modeling sequences yet remain single- or limited-modality, restricting their applicability for unified multimodal learning. To bridge this gap, we intro-duce a large-scale, fully aligned multimodal CAD dataset that integrates text descriptions, CAD programs, rendered images, sketches, point clouds, and QA pairs. This unified design supports diverse research directions, including text-to-CAD, image/sketch-to-CAD, point-cloud-to-CAD, and CAD-based question answering, enabling both multi-modal understanding and generation within a single benchmark. Our dataset builds upon three foundational sources: DeepCAD [46], Text2CAD [16], and CAD-Recode [30]. DeepCAD provides 178K parametric CAD models repre-sented as sketch–extrude command sequences. Text2CAD further augments a subset of these models with 600K+ nat-ural language descriptions, including both high-level se-mantic summaries and step-by-step modeling instructions. CAD-Recode contributes over 1M synthetically generated CAD programs, where sketch and operation parameters are 

Figure 2. Overview of our data generation pipeline. 

randomly sampled under topological and geometric heuris-tics to ensure controllable structure and feature diversity. We extend these datasets with additional multimodal an-notations to improve scale and diversity. To enable fair comparison with prior work, we preserve the original Deep-CAD/Text2CAD test split (8,046 models) for CAD gener-ation evaluation. This benchmark is further enriched with 4Figure 3. Examples from UniCAD. Each sample consists of aligned multi-modal data, including textual descriptions, point clouds, multi-view renderings, sketches, and QA annotations. While the full dataset provides images from eight viewpoints per CAD model, we display 4 randomly selected views for clarity. 

multi-view renderings, sketches, and QA pairs to support comprehensive multimodal assessment as shown in Fig. 3. 

3.1. JSON-to-CadQuery Conversion 

We convert all CAD designs into CadQuery [5] scripts, a Python-based parametric CAD framework that is ex-ecutable, interpretable, and lightweight. Compared to FreeCAD or OpenSCAD, CadQuery provides a clean API (e.g ., box() , circle() , extrude() ) and can be ex-ecuted without a full CAD environment, making it ideal for integration with large language models (LLMs) that natively generate Python code. This choice ensures that each sample in our dataset is both verifiable and ed-itable, aligning with the practical needs of design au-tomation and human-in-the-loop CAD workflows. Text-to-CADQuery [48] uses large language models (LLMs) to convert structured JSON descriptions of modeling opera-tions into executable CadQuery code. While scalable, this LLM-based method is non-deterministic and error-prone (85% success rate reported by the authors), often gener-ating invalid sketches or missing operations. In contrast, we developed a deterministic JSON-to-CadQuery transla-tor via a rule-based Python script. Each JSON operation maps directly to a corresponding CadQuery API call, guar-anteeing one-to-one correspondence, syntactic validity, and reproducibility. Our converter achieves 100% execution success, producing geometrically consistent CAD models with no hallucinations. To validate geometric faithfulness, we compare the converted models with DeepCAD ground-truth models: 99.2% of samples achieve ≥98% voxel over-lap. This rule-based design offers superior reliability and interpretability, making it well-suited for large-scale CAD dataset annotation and multi-modal learning. 

3.2. Point Cloud Generation 

To bridge geometric and perception-based learning, we gen-erate point clouds by uniformly sampling points from each CAD mesh surface. Each point is annotated with normal vectors derived from the underlying geometry, providing an additional modality for point-based reconstruction models. 

3.3. Synthetic Rendering 

For each CAD model, we render multi-view synthetic im-age renderings from eight fixed perspectives using the Cad-Query toolchain. Eight rendering views include: Front, Left, Right, Top, and four isometric views from (±s, ±s, s ).The rendering process employs a neutral background, con-sistent lighting, and standardized camera poses to ensure 5cross-model comparability. These images serve as the vi-sual grounding for tasks such as image-conditioned CAD generation. 

3.4. Sketch Generation 

Previous works [9, 54] have often relied on heuristic meth-ods such as edge detection to produce sketch-like render-ings, yet these heuristic methods yield unrealistic or noisy results. We instead employ the open-source Qwen-Image-Edit model [45], which jointly performs semantic and appearance-level editing. Starting from synthetic render-ings, we apply controlled image editing to produce sketches that mimic hand-drawn line art consistent with real design drafts. The corresponding prompts are provided in the sup-plementary. This approach significantly improves the di-versity and realism of image modalities while maintaining geometric consistency with the source CAD. 

3.5. CAD Question Answering (CAD QA) 

To construct the CAD QA subset, we automatically gener-ate question–answer pairs grounded in rendered CAD im-ages and symbolic CAD programs, enabling evaluation of joint geometric perception and symbolic–procedural rea-soning. We adopt a semi-automatic annotation pipeline. Given multi-view CAD renderings and their correspond-ing modeling programs, GPT-4o simultaneously generates questions and answers in a 4-way multiple-choice format. The generated questions target both visual–geometric un-derstanding and program-level reasoning ( e.g ., “What shape results if the second extrusion is removed?”), with answers grounded in the CAD models. To validate annotation qual-ity, we conduct human verification on a subset of samples. A study on 500 randomly sampled QA pairs shows >92% agreement between model-generated and human-authored answers, confirming the reliability of the automatic an-notations. We next conduct human-in-the-loop filtering, whereby annotators inspect and amend generated answers to guarantee correctness. 

3.6. Dataset Statistics 

UniCAD contains 1,448,150 CAD models, making it one of the largest multi-modal CAD datasets to date. Each sam-ple is paired with a CadQuery program, textual descrip-tion, multi-view images and sketches, and point clouds, en-abling joint learning across diverse 3D representations. As shown in Fig. 4, UniCAD exhibits significantly higher CAD operation counts per model than DeepCAD [46], indicat-ing greater geometric and topological complexity. This in-creased structural richness presents a more challenging and representative benchmark for real-world CAD understand-ing and generation tasks.  

> Figure 4. Comparison of operation counts per CAD model be-tween UniCAD (Ours) and DeepCAD.

# 4. Method 

4.1. Problem Formulation 

We formulate CAD modeling as a sequence generation task over a programmatic representation. A CAD model is rep-resented by an executable program τ = ( t1, t 2, . . . , t n),where ti corresponds to a CADQuery code token. Our goal is to learn a single, multimodal model πθ that can perform diverse CAD-related tasks conditioned on a mul-timodal query q, which can be a combination of text Xt, a set of images Xv , and a point cloud Xp.

(1) CAD Reconstruction and Generation. For gen-eration tasks, the model takes a query q = ( Xt, X v , X p)

specifying the desired object and generates a complete, ex-ecutable CAD program. The model’s output is the program 

τ that satisfies the geometric and semantic constraints of the query: τ = πθ (q).

(2) CAD Question Answering. For reasoning tasks, the model is given a query q and an existing CAD program τ . It then generates a textual answer a by jointly reasoning over the query and the program’s symbolic structure and implicit geometry: a = πθ (q, τ ).

4.2. UniCAD-MLLM Architecture 

As illustrated in Fig. 5, UniCAD-MLLM extends Qwen2-VL-2B [41], a powerful multimodal large language model (MLLM), to handle CAD tasks. We integrate a lightweight, trainable point cloud projection module and fine-tune the model to decode CAD programs and textual answers. No-tably, UniCAD-MLLM does not mandate the presence of all modalities, accommodating real-world data scarcity. Through a unified prompt framework, each modality is treated as an optional token module; missing inputs (tex-t/image/point cloud) are replaced by generic instructions, enabling flexible multimodal reasoning. 

(1) Multimodal Encoders. UniCAD-MLLM processes three distinct input modalities. For a textual description Xt,6Figure 5. Overview of UniCAD-MLLM architecture. The model processes three distinct input modalities, each distinguished by a unique color code: point clouds are handled via a trainable projection layer, images are encoded using the visual encoder, and text is fed into the tokenizer. Its outputs are CADQuery programs for CAD reconstruction and generation tasks, and textual responses for CAD QA tasks. 

we use the MLLM’s native text tokenizer. For a set of k

multi-view images Xv = {xiv }ki=1 , we extract visual fea-tures using the pretrained MLLM vision encoder. For 3D geometry, we introduce a dedicated point cloud encoder. Given a point cloud Xp ∈ RN ×3 with N points, our module maps it to a fixed-size set of descriptive embedding vectors 

Ep ∈ RNp×dmodel , where Np ≪ N and dmodel is the model’s hidden dimension. This projection module, inspired by CAD-Recode [30], consists of three stages: (1) Furthest Point Sampling (FPS) to select a representative subset of 

Np points from Xp. (2) Fourier positional encoding [56] applied to the 3D coordinates of the sampled points to cap-ture high-frequency details. (3) A linear projection layer that maps the resulting features into the dmodel -dimensional embedding space. This module is lightweight and trained end-to-end with the rest of the model. 

(2) Unified Input Representation. Given a multimodal query q = ( Xt, X v , X p), we first encode each modality into a sequence of embedding vectors: Et for text, Ev for images, and Ep for the point cloud. These sequences are then concatenated to form a single, unified prompt sequence 

Eprompt = Concat (Et, Ev , Ep), where Concat (·) joins the sequences along the token dimension. This unified repre-sentation serves as the input to the MLLM’s decoder. 

(3) Autoregressive Decoding for Generation and QA. 

The core of UniCAD-MLLM is an autoregressive language decoder, which generates outputs token by token, condi-tioned on the input embeddings. For CAD generation and reconstruction, the decoder models the probability of the next program token ti given the preceding tokens and the prompt embeddings p(ti|t<i , Eprompt ). The final program τ

is generated by sampling from this distribution. For ques-tion answering, the input to the decoder is a concatenation of the prompt embeddings Eprompt and the token embed-dings of the given CAD program Eτ . The decoder then gen-erates the textual answer a by reasoning over this combined context. Both tasks are optimized jointly under the stan-dard cross-entropy loss for autoregressive language model-ing. By fine-tuning the language model and the new pro-jection module, UniCAD-MLLM enhances its cross-modal reasoning and geometric understanding capabilities. 

4.3. Implementation Details 

Model Configuration. UniCAD-MLLM inherits the text and image processing capabilities of Qwen2-VL. For the 3D modality, we sample Np = 256 points from each point cloud via FPS. These points are then embedded into the model’s hidden dimension of dmodel = 1536 using a single linear layer. During training, we randomly sample the num-ber of input image views (ranging from one to four views) for data augmentation, while for evaluation, we use four fixed-pose rendered views. 

Training Setup. We initialize our model from Qwen2-VL-2B-Instruct, training the new point cloud projection module from scratch while fine-tuning the language model’s param-eters. The model is trained for 190k steps using the AdamW optimizer with a peak learning rate of 2×10 −4. The training was performed on 8 NVIDIA A800 GPUs, using a per-GPU batch size of 2 with 4 gradient accumulation steps to achieve an effective batch size of 64. The entire process consumed approximately 800 GPU hours. 

# 5. Experiments 

5.1. Evaluation Metrics 

We adopt two standard evaluation metrics: Chamfer Dis-tance (CD) and Volumetric Intersection over Union (IoU). These metrics are used consistently across all methods to evaluate the quality of the generated 3D shapes. 7Table 2. Results on UniCAD test set. The best results are bold . Our UniCAD-MLLM trained jointly on three modalities outperforms all existing modality-specific methods. For fair comparisons, all results are obtained without RL fine-tuning or test-time sampling. ↑ means higher is better. ↓ means lower is better.                                                                                                                                                                                

> Method Point Cloud Text Multi-view Images Multi-view Sketches CAD QA CD ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IoU ↑Acc ↑
> PointNet →DeepCAD [46] 9.64 46.7 -------Point-BERT →HNC-CAD [51] 8.64 65.3 -------MultiCAD [25] 8.09 --------TransCAD [11] 4.51 65.5 -------PrismCAD [19] 4.28 72.1 -------Point2Cyl [38] 4.27 73.8 -------CAD-Diffuser [26] 3.02 74.3 -------CAD-SIGNet [15] 0.29 77.3 -------CAD-Recode [30] 0.18 87.1 -------BERT →DeepCAD [46] --32.8 ------Text2CAD [16] --0.37 71.5 -----DINOv2 →HNC-CAD [51] ----2.08 ----DINOv2 →DeepCAD [46] ----1.13 ----CADCrafter [8] ----0.26 ----Cadrille [18] 0.18 87.1 0.20 82.1 0.18 86.1 ---GPT-4o [14] --------0.77 Doubao-Seed-1.6 [36] --------0.85
> UniCAD-MLLM 0.17 89.7 0.20 86.3 0.17 89.8 0.22 84.2 0.90

Chamfer Distance (CD): Measures the geometric dis-crepancy between the generated and ground-truth 3D mod-els [12]. For each STL mesh, we normalize its scale, uni-formly sample 8,192 surface points, and compute the aver-age squared distance between nearest neighbors across both point clouds: 

CD( P, Q ) = 1

|P |

X

> p∈P

min  

> q∈Q

∥p−q∥2+ 1

|Q|

X

> q∈Q

min  

> p∈P

∥q−p∥2,

(1) where P and Q are point sets sampled from the predicted and ground-truth shapes, respectively. Lower values indi-cate higher geometric fidelity. Values are multiplied by 10 3.

Volumetric Intersection over Union (IoU): To assess 3D shape similarity, we compute the volumetric Intersec-tion over Union (IoU) between voxelized versions of the predicted and ground-truth meshes [47]. Both meshes are first normalized to fit within the unit cube [0 , 1] 3, then vox-elized using a resolution of 0.02 . Let V1 and V2 denote the occupied voxel grids. IoU is computed as: 

IoU = |V1 ∩ V2||V1 ∪ V2| (2) This metric captures global shape overlap and is particularly useful for assessing coarse structural fidelity. Padding is applied to align voxel grid sizes when necessary. 

5.2. Experimental Results 

Main Results on UniCAD Tab. 2 summarizes results on the UniCAD benchmark across four input modalities (point clouds, text, multi-view images, sketches) and the 

Table 3. Results of CAD reconstruction from a single image on the UniCAD dataset.                   

> Method Single-view Image CD ↓IoU ↑
> GPT-4o [14, 42] 62.6 -CAD-GPT [42] 9.77 -DINOv2 →HNC-CAD [51] 2.14 -Img2CAD [9] 1.60 -DINOv2 →DeepCAD [46] 1.26 -CADCrafter [8] 0.72 -Cadrille [18] 0.21 81.7
> UniCAD-MLLM 0.17 87.6

CAD-QA task. Note that the UniCAD test set is identi-cal to that of DeepCAD/Text2CAD, and some state-of-the-art results are sourced from [18]. Our model achieves su-perior overall performance through a unified multimodal objective, outperforming prior methods that are typically modality-specialized. Furthermore, our results demon-strate that cross-task and cross-modal supervision provide complementary signals that significantly enhance data effi-ciency. Notably, UniCAD-MLLM achieves the highest geo-metric reconstruction fidelity with CD of 0.17–0.22 and IoU up to 89.8% on multi-view images. On the CAD QA sub-set, UniCAD-MLLM reaches 90.0% accuracy, outperform-ing general-purpose VLM baselines such as GPT-4o [14] and Doubao-Seed-1.6 [36] by a substantial margin, demon-strating superior joint visual–procedural reasoning. 

Single-view CAD Reconstruction We further evaluate single-image CAD reconstruction to compare with image-8Table 4. Results on Fusion360 test set.                                              

> Method Point Cloud Multi-view Images CD ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IoU ↑
> DeepCAD [46] 89.2 39.9 --MultiCAD [25] 42.2 ---HNC-CAD [51] 36.8 63.5 --TransCAD [11] 33.4 60.2 --CAD-Diffuser [26] 3.85 63.2 --CAD-SIGNet [15] 0.70 58.4 --CAD-Recode [30] 0.19 79.1 --LRM [13] →CAD-Recode [30] --0.62 62.5 Cadrille [18] 0.19 79.8 0.20 77.6
> UniCAD-MLLM 0.18 84.3 0.16 83.9

only baselines (Tab. 3). Note that some results are bor-rowed from [18]. Despite being trained on multimodal inputs rather than single images alone, UniCAD-MLLM outperforms all existing methods, improving median CD from 0.21 to 0.17 and IoU from 81.7% to 87.6% over Cadrille [18]. As expected, single-view reconstruction remains slightly more ambiguous than multi-view input (87.6% vs. 89.8% IoU), but the gap remains small, indi-cating robust visual reasoning and shape completion ability. We additionally compare to prompting-based CAD systems (e.g . GPT-4o and CAD-GPT [42]), which can be prompted to directly generate CAD code from images, but exhibits a high Chamfer Distance (62.6 CD in Tab. 3), confirming that general-purpose VLMs struggle with the structural and syntactic demands of executable CAD generation. 

Zero-shot Generalization Assessment on Fusion360 To assess cross-dataset generalization, we evaluate on 1,512 randomly sampled models from Fusion360 under a standard zero-shot protocol [15]. Fusion360 [44] is a small CAD re-construction benchmark with complex and realistic CAD models. Results are shown in Tab. 4. Note that some re-sults are borrowed from [18]. Our model consistently out-performs both point-cloud and image-based baselines. For point-cloud reconstruction, UniCAD-MLLM achieves the highest IoU (84.3%), surpassing CAD-Recode [30] (79.1%) and Cadrille [18] (79.8%). For image-based reconstruc-tion, we compare with a strong pipeline baseline that con-verts multi-view images to point clouds using LRM [13] and then applies CAD-Recode. Even against this optimized hybrid pipeline, UniCAD-MLLM improves IoU by +21.4% (83.9% vs. 62.5%) and reduces CD by 3.9× (0.16 vs. 0.62). Compared to Cadrille [18], our model still achieves better geometry accuracy in both modalities, demonstrating su-perior generalization despite learning from a more diverse multimodal training objective. 

Multimodal-Conditioned CAD Generation We evalu-ate the robustness of our model under varying input modal-ities, as reported in Table 5. Single-view sketches often capture only partial geometry, leading to incomplete recon-

Table 5. Multimodal-Input-Conditioned CAD Generation.         

> Modality CD ↓IoU ↑
> Sketch only 0.38 74.2 Text only 0.20 86.3 Text + Sketch 0.18 88.6

structions. Conditioning on text descriptions mitigates this limitation by providing complementary semantic priors, en-abling the model to infer missing geometric regions and generate more complete CAD structures. Fusing sketch and textual inputs consistently outperforms unimodal baselines across both metrics, reducing reconstruction error (CD) and improving surface alignment (IoU). These findings validate the efficacy of our model in leveraging cross-modal signals, particularly when navigating partial or ambiguous observa-tions, resulting in more faithful and geometrically integral CAD reconstructions. By facilitating complementary super-vision within a unified executable CAD space, multimodal inputs consistently outperform unimodal baselines. This synergistic fusion not only bolsters model robustness but also aligns with thehybrid-input-driven workflowsprevalent in industrial CAD practice. 

# 6. Conclusion 

We presented UniCAD, a unified benchmark for multi-modal and multi-task CAD understanding and generation. UniCAD standardizes data organization, task definitions, and evaluation across diverse modalities, i.e . text, images, sketches, and point clouds, thereby enabling systematic study of text/image/sketch/point-cloud →CAD, and CAD question-answering tasks within a single framework. The proposed UniCAD-MLLM achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance and demonstrates strong cross-modal generaliza-tion. UniCAD lays a solid foundation for general-purpose CAD intelligence, bridging multi-modal perception and ex-ecutable design generation. 

Limitations and Future Work. Despite its contributions, several limitations remain. The current dataset, like exist-ing benchmarks such as DeepCAD and Text2CAD, is con-strained by publicly available CAD data and remains largely focused on sketch-and-extrude modeling, with limited cov-erage of advanced operations such as chamfers, fillets, and freeform surfaces. In addition, the current MLLM backbone is pretrained on natural images rather than CAD-specific ge-ometry, and the point encoder lacks large-scale geometric pretraining, which may limit spatial reasoning for complex structures. Future work will explore CAD-oriented pre-training, geometry-aware fusion, and self-corrective feed-back, while extending UniCAD toward industrial datasets and interactive CAD editing scenarios. 9Broader Impact. UniCAD contributes toward bridg-ing multimodal learning and computer-aided design, promoting interpretable and reproducible 3D model generation. Its deterministic code-based output may benefit manufacturing, reverse engineering, and digital twin applications by improving design automation and knowledge transfer. However, as with all generative models, risks include potential misuse for proprietary design reproduction or biased dataset artifacts. We en-courage responsible deployment of UniCAD, accompanied by dataset transparency, open evaluation, and adher-ence to ethical design and intellectual property standards. 

# References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 ,2023. 3 [2] Md Ferdous Alam and Faez Ahmed. Gencad: Image-conditioned computer-aided design generation with transformer-based contrastive representation and diffusion priors. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2025. 3 [3] Kamel Alrashedy, Pradyumna Tambwekar, Zulfiqar Haider Zaidi, Megan Langwasser, Wei Xu, and Matthew Gombolay. Generating cad code with vision-language models for 3d de-signs. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , pages 52236–52262, 2025. 3 [4] Silvia Ansaldi, Leila De Floriani, and Bianca Falcidieno. Ge-ometric modeling of solid objects by using a face adjacency graph representation. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics ,19(3):131–139, 1985. 2 [5] CadQuery Authors. Cadquery/cadquery: Cadquery 2.4.0, 2024. 2, 3, 5, 13 [6] Akshay Badagabettu, Sai Sravan Yarlagadda, and Amir Barati Farimani. Query2cad: Generating cad models using natural language queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00144 , 2024. 3, 4 [7] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966 , 2023. 3 [8] Cheng Chen, Jiacheng Wei, Tianrun Chen, Chi Zhang, Xi-aofeng Yang, Shangzhan Zhang, Bingchen Yang, Chuan-Sheng Foo, Guosheng Lin, Qixing Huang, et al. Cad-crafter: Generating computer-aided design models from un-constrained images. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , 2025. 3, 8 [9] Tianrun Chen, Chunan Yu, Yuanqi Hu, Jing Li, Tao Xu, Run-long Cao, Lanyun Zhu, Ying Zang, Yong Zhang, Zejian Li, et al. Img2cad: Conditioned 3-d cad model generation from single image with structured visual geometry. IEEE Trans-actions on Industrial Informatics , 2025. 4, 6, 8 [10] Elona Dupont, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, Sk Aziz Ali, Ilya Arzhannikov, Gleb Gusev, and Djamila Aouada. Cadops-net: Jointly learning cad operation types and steps from boundary-representations. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , pages 114–123. IEEE, 2022. 4 [11] Elona Dupont, Kseniya Cherenkova, Dimitrios Mallis, Gleb Gusev, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. Transcad: A hi-erarchical transformer for cad sequence inference from point clouds. In Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. , pages 19–36. Springer, 2024. 3, 8, 9 [12] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. A point set generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a single image. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 605–613, 2017. 8 [13] Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3d. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , 2024. 9 [14] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perel-man, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Weli-hinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. 3, 8 [15] Mohammad Sadil Khan, Elona Dupont, Sk Aziz Ali, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. Cad-signet: Cad language inference from point clouds using layer-wise sketch instance guided attention. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 4713–4722, 2024. 8, 9 [16] Mohammad Sadil Khan, Sankalp Sinha, Talha Uddin, Di-dier Stricker, Sk Aziz Ali, and Muhammad Zeshan Afzal. Text2cad: Generating sequential cad designs from beginner-to-expert level text prompts. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. , 37:7552–7579, 2024. 3, 4, 8 [17] Sebastian Koch, Albert Matveev, Zhongshi Jiang, Francis Williams, Alexey Artemov, Evgeny Burnaev, Marc Alexa, Denis Zorin, and Daniele Panozzo. Abc: A big cad model dataset for geometric deep learning. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 9601–9611, 2019. 4 [18] Maksim Kolodiazhnyi, Denis Tarasov, Dmitrii Zhem-chuzhnikov, Alexander Nikulin, Ilya Zisman, Anna Vorontsova, Anton Konushin, Vladislav Kurenkov, and Danila Rukhovich. cadrille: Multi-modal cad reconstruc-tion with online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22914 , 2025. 3, 8, 9, 16 [19] Joseph George Lambourne, Karl Willis, Pradeep Kumar Ja-yaraman, Longfei Zhang, Aditya Sanghi, and Kamal Rahimi Malekshan. Reconstructing editable prismatic cad from rounded voxel models. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Confer-ence Papers , pages 1–9, 2022. 8 [20] Changjian Li, Hao Pan, Adrien Bousseau, and Niloy J Mi-tra. Sketch2cad: Sequential cad modeling by sketching in context. ACM Trans. Graph. , 39(6):1–14, 2020. 3 [21] Changjian Li, Hao Pan, Adrien Bousseau, and Niloy J Mitra. Free2cad: Parsing freehand drawings into cad commands. 

ACM Trans. Graph. , 41(4):1–16, 2022. 3, 4 [22] Lingxiao Li, Minhyuk Sung, Anastasia Dubrovina, Li Yi, and Leonidas J Guibas. Supervised fitting of geometric prim-itives to 3d point clouds. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 2652–2660, 2019. 2 [23] Xueyang Li, Jiahao Li, Yu Song, Yunzhong Lou, and Xiang-dong Zhou. Seek-cad: A self-refined generative modeling 

10 for 3d parametric cad using local inference via deepseek. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , 2026. 3 [24] Haoyu Lu, Wen Liu, Bo Zhang, Bingxuan Wang, Kai Dong, Bo Liu, Jingxiang Sun, Tongzheng Ren, Zhuoshu Li, Hao Yang, Yaofeng Sun, Chengqi Deng, Hanwei Xu, Zhenda Xie, and Chong Ruan. Deepseek-vl: Towards real-world vision-language understanding, 2024. 3 [25] Weijian Ma, Minyang Xu, Xueyang Li, and Xiangdong Zhou. Multicad: Contrastive representation learning for multi-modal 3d computer-aided design models. In Proceed-ings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Informa-tion and Knowledge Management , pages 1766–1776, 2023. 8, 9 [26] Weijian Ma, Shuaiqi Chen, Yunzhong Lou, Xueyang Li, and Xiangdong Zhou. Draw step by step: Reconstructing cad construction sequences from point clouds via multimodal diffusion. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 27154–27163, 2024. 8, 9 [27] Dimitrios Mallis, Ahmet Serda Karadeniz, Sebastian Cavada, Danila Rukhovich, Niki Foteinopoulou, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. Cad-assistant: tool-augmented vllms as generic cad task solvers. In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , pages 7284–7294, 2025. 3 [28] Charlie Nash, Yaroslav Ganin, SM Ali Eslami, and Peter Battaglia. Polygen: An autoregressive generative model of 3d meshes. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , pages 7220–7229. PMLR, 2020. 2 [29] Zeju Qiu, Weiyang Liu, Haiwen Feng, Zhen Liu, Tim Xiao, Katherine Collins, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Adrian Weller, Michael J Black, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Can large lan-guage models understand symbolic graphics programs? In 

Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , pages 26265–26311, 2025. 3, 4 [30] Danila Rukhovich, Elona Dupont, Dimitrios Mallis, Kseniya Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. Cad-recode: Reverse engineering cad code from point clouds. In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , pages 9801–9811, 2025. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9 [31] MMM Sarcar, K Mallikarjuna Rao, and K Lalit Narayan. 

Computer aided design and manufacturing . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2008. 1 [32] Ari Seff, Yaniv Ovadia, Wenda Zhou, and Ryan P Adams. Sketchgraphs: A large-scale dataset for modeling rela-tional geometry in computer-aided design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08506 , 2020. 3 [33] Gopal Sharma, Difan Liu, Subhransu Maji, Evangelos Kalogerakis, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, and Radom´ ır Mˇ ech. Parsenet: A parametric surface fitting network for 3d point clouds. In Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. , pages 261–276. Springer, 2020. 2 [34] Dmitriy Smirnov, Mikhail Bessmeltsev, and Justin Solomon. Learning manifold patch-based representations of man-made shapes. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , 2021. 2 [35] Yuewan Sun, Xingang Li, and Zhenghui Sha. Large lan-guage models for computer-aided design (llm4cad) fine-tuned: Dataset and experiments. Journal of Mechanical De-sign , pages 1–19, 2025. 4 [36] ByteDance Seed Team. Seed 1.6: Tech introduction. 

https : / / seed . bytedance . com / en / seed1 _ 6 ,2025. Accessed on September 28, 2025. 8 [37] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. 3 [38] Mikaela Angelina Uy, Yen-Yu Chang, Minhyuk Sung, Purvi Goel, Joseph G Lambourne, Tolga Birdal, and Leonidas J Guibas. Point2cyl: Reverse engineering 3d objects from point clouds to extrusion cylinders. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 11850–11860, 2022. 3, 8 [39] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. , 30, 2017. 2 [40] Kehan Wang, Jia Zheng, and Zihan Zhou. Neural face identi-fication in a 2d wireframe projection of a manifold object. In 

IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 1622–1631, 2022. 2 [41] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. 3, 6 [42] Siyu Wang, Cailian Chen, Xinyi Le, Qimin Xu, Lei Xu, Yanzhou Zhang, and Jie Yang. Cad-gpt: Synthesising cad construction sequence with spatial reasoning-enhanced mul-timodal llms. In AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , pages 7880–7888, 2025. 3, 8, 9 [43] Xiaogang Wang, Yuelang Xu, Kai Xu, Andrea Tagliasac-chi, Bin Zhou, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, and Hao Zhang. Pie-net: Parametric inference of point cloud edges. Adv. Neural In-form. Process. Syst. , 33:20167–20178, 2020. 2 [44] Karl DD Willis, Yewen Pu, Jieliang Luo, Hang Chu, Tao Du, Joseph G Lambourne, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Wo-jciech Matusik. Fusion 360 gallery: A dataset and environ-ment for programmatic cad construction from human design sequences. ACM Trans. Graph. , 40(4):1–24, 2021. 3, 4, 9 [45] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng-ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, et al. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 , 2025. 6, 12 [46] Rundi Wu, Chang Xiao, and Changxi Zheng. Deepcad: A deep generative network for computer-aided design models. In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , pages 6772–6782, 2021. 3, 4, 6, 8, 9 [47] Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Lin-guang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In 

IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 1912–1920, 2015. 8 [48] Haoyang Xie and Feng Ju. Text-to-cadquery: A new paradigm for cad generation with scalable large model ca-pabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06507 , 2025. 3, 4, 5 [49] Jingwei Xu, Zibo Zhao, Chenyu Wang, Wen Liu, Yi Ma, and Shenghua Gao. Cad-mllm: Unifying multimodality-conditioned cad generation with mllm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04954 , 2024. 3, 4 

11 [50] Xiang Xu, Karl DD Willis, Joseph G Lambourne, Chin-Yi Cheng, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Skexgen: Autoregressive generation of cad construction se-quences with disentangled codebooks. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , pages 24698–24724. PMLR, 2022. 3 [51] Xiang Xu, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Joseph G Lambourne, Karl DD Willis, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Hierarchical neural coding for controllable cad model generation. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , pages 38443–38461, 2023. 3, 8, 9 [52] Xiang Xu, Joseph Lambourne, Pradeep Jayaraman, Zhengqing Wang, Karl Willis, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Brepgen: A b-rep generative diffusion model with structured latent geometry. ACM Trans. Graph. , 43(4):1–14, 2024. 2 [53] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li, Chengyuan Li, Dayi-heng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. corr, abs/2407.10671, 2024. doi: 10.48550. arXiv preprint ARXIV.2407.10671 , 2024. 3 [54] Yang You, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Jiaqi Han, Rahul Thomas, Haotong Zhang, Yi Du, Hansheng Chen, Francis Engel-mann, Suya You, and Leonidas Guibas. Img2cad: Re-verse engineering 3d cad models from images through vlm-assisted conditional factorization. In Proceedings of the SIG-GRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2025. 3, 4, 6 [55] Zhe Yuan, Jianqi Shi, and Yanhong Huang. Openecad: An efficient visual language model for editable 3d-cad design.     

> Computers & Graphics , 124:104048, 2024. 4 [56] Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xin Chen, Xianfang Zeng, Rui Wang, Pei Cheng, BIN FU, Tao Chen, Gang YU, and Shenghua Gao. Michelangelo: Conditional 3d shape generation based on shape-image-text aligned latent representation. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. , 2023. 7 [57] Shengdi Zhou, Tianyi Tang, and Bin Zhou. Cadparser: A learning approach of sequence modeling for b-rep cad. In
> Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. , pages 1804–1812, 2023. 4

# A. Details on UniCAD Dataset Construction 

A.1. Sketch Generation 

We input the multi-view rendered images of CAD models into the image editing model from Qwen-Image-Edit [45]. The following prompt was used: 

“This is a multi-view rendered image of a CAD part. Please convert the style to a sketch style while preserving the original image content. Only modify the visual style and keep the geometry and structure unchanged.” 

This process enables us to obtain sketch-style images that maintain the original geometric information of the CAD models while providing a hand-drawn visual appearance. 

A.2. Text Description Generation 

We adopt a two-stage strategy for generating textual de-scriptions of CAD models. 

Stage 1: Abstract Geometric Feature Synthesis. In the initial stage, we leverage GPT-4o to generate abstract, object-level textual descriptions that encapsulate the visual and structural essence of CAD models. This process is engi-neered to produce meticulous geometric reports, capturing intricate features such as hollow frustums with uniform wall thickness, hemispherical shells with internal vertical ribs, or T-shaped structures with specific hook-like protrusions. To achieve this, each CAD model is first rendered into multi-view images. These images are then fed into GPT-4o using a specialized Structured Engineering Prompt: 

“As a Senior CAD Engineer, provide a rigorous geometric decomposition report to a junior de-signer, enabling them to precisely reconstruct the model without visual assistance. Based on the multi-view rendered images, integrate the primi-tive geometric shapes, profile and cross-sectional features, 3D and local structural characteristics (such as draft angles, fillets, and ribs), topolog-ical structure, and spatial relationships between components into a standardized modeling logic. Ensure the description covers the complete tech-nical workflow, ranging from initial sketch con-straints to advanced feature modeling, including Boolean operations, patterns, and shelling.” 

By following this prompt, GPT-4o generates detailed natural language descriptions that prioritize geometric and constructive integrity. This approach ensures the output fo-cuses on the model’s fundamental topology while intention-ally filtering out irrelevant visual attributes such as color or material texture. 

Stage 2: High-Fidelity Textual Description Genera-tion. In the second stage, we generate detailed textual 12 instructions that describe the CAD construction process. Specifically, we integrate the CadQuery [5] source code, multi-view rendered images, and the geometric descriptions generated in the first stage as multimodal inputs to GPT-4o. This integration aims to produce high-fidelity, expert-level CAD modeling specifications, rather than merely providing simple visual summaries of the models. By incorporating precise geometric topology, absolute and relative dimen-sional parameters, and rigorous sketch constraints, the gen-erated text clearly conveys the underlying parametric con-struction logic of the model, enabling users to better under-stand the modeling process and supporting high-precision reconstruction of the CAD model. To achieve this, we have developed a systematic conver-sion framework guided by a Structured Expert Prompt: 

“You are a Senior Lead CAD Engineer. Your task is to translate parametric CAD designs into highly precise, natural language modeling in-structions to guide high-fidelity reconstruction in any professional CAD software. Based on the provided CadQuery code, rendered images, and initial geometric descriptions, you must: (1) Extract all critical numerical parameters (e.g., radii, lengths, extrusion depths) and define their relative proportions; (2) Explicitly identify refer-ence workplanes (XY, YZ, XZ) and the origin; (3) Precisely specify target entities such as ’the top-most face’ or ’edges parallel to the X-axis’; (4) Define sketch constraints including concentric-ity, tangency, and axial symmetry. Integrate di-mensions directly into the geometric description while strictly omitting any non-functional visual attributes such as color, material, or lighting. The resulting output is organized into a standardized, five-part architectural hierarchy: (1) Global Pa-rameters and Constants: Definition of key vari-ables and their proportional relationships. (2) Reference Planes and Primary Geometry: Sketch constraints and foundational 3D modeling oper-ations. (3) Secondary Features and Boolean Op-erations: Precise positioning and sizing of addi-tive or subtractive structures. (4) Transformation and Pattern Logic: Detailed descriptions of lin-ear/circular arrays or mirroring operations. (5) Topological Refinement: Identification of target edges and parameters for fillets and chamfers.” 

Through this structured workflow, the system produces highly detailed, parameter-driven CAD modeling descrip-tions, effectively bridging the gap between CAD textual representations and engineering design intent. For exam-ple, for the three CAD models in Stage 1, the following descriptions are generated: • Component 1: Tapered Hollow Cylinder Array specifies global parameters including outer radius Rout = 0 .4, in-ner radius Rin = 0 .3 (wall thickness w = 0 .1), extrusion height H = 0 .8, negative draft angle α = −5◦, and linear array pitch S = 0 .9. On the XY workplane at the ori-gin, concentric circle sketches define the cylinder cross-section, extruded along the +Z direction with the taper applied. A secondary base plate of thickness 0.05 is inte-grated via Boolean union at the bottom face, followed by a 2 × 2 linear array along the X and Y axes to complete the configuration. • Component 2: Ribbed Hemispherical Shell Array has a sphere radius Rs = 0 .5, shell thickness t = 0 .04 , and in-ternal ribs with width Wr = 0 .06 and depth Dr = 0 .12 .A semicircular sketch on the XZ plane is revolved and shelled to form a hemispherical shell. Three rectangu-lar ribs are added on the interior surface with 120 ◦ radial symmetry and tangency constraints, and then arranged in a circular array of four units around the global origin, with 

90 ◦ intervals. • Component 3: Orthogonal T-Hook Component Array de-fines a post height Hp = 0.6, crossbar width Wb =0.4, hook extension Lh = 0.15 , and extrusion thick-ness T = 0 .08 . A T-shaped profile is sketched on the YZ plane with perpendicularity and axial symmetry con-straints, extruded symmetrically along the X-axis. An L-shaped hook with a fillet radius of 0.03 is extruded from the bottom of the vertical post, and four instances are placed via rotational symmetry around the Z-axis, with hooks facing inward toward the center. All dimensions, topological references, and sketch constraints are explic-itly defined, while non-functional visual attributes such as color or material are omitted. 

A.3. QA Pairs Generation. 

We input the multi-view rendered images and textual de-scriptions into GPT-4o, and by using a structured prompt, we guide the model to generate a series of four-option multiple-choice questions (MCQs) to assess a comprehen-sive understanding of CAD geometry. The prompt is for-mulated as follows: 

“Given the multi-view rendered images and the structural description of the CAD model, gen-erate a series of geometric assessment ques-tions. Each question must include four an-swer options and a correct answer, cover-ing the following domains: (1) Fundamen-tal Geometry—primitive types, surface and curve characteristics, and features such as holes or bosses; (2) Topology—entity relation-ships, face-edge connectivity, and structural hierarchy; (3) Constraints—sketch-level con-straints and 3D spatial alignment; and (4) Pat-

13 terns—transformation logic, including linear and circular arrays as well as mirror symmetry. The output format should follow the template: Q: [question], A: [correct answer].” 

By leveraging this integrated multimodal framework, large-scale, high-fidelity question-answering datasets for CAD models can be generated, providing a solid foundation for the training and benchmarking of specialized LLMs in the CAD model domain. 

# B. Comparison and Rationale for Selecting CadQuery 

B.1. Comparative Analysis 

We conducted a comparative analysis of four parametric CAD modeling tools. The evaluation prioritizes practical attributes critical to automated workflows: software de-pendencies, scripting language accessibility and modeling complexity (Table 6). 

> Table 6. Comparison of Open-Source CAD Modeling Tools

Tool Requires Software Scripting Language Modeling Complexity 

FreeCAD Yes Python Low OpenSCAD Yes OpenSCAD DSL Medium PythonOCC No Python High CadQuery No Python Low Among these tools, CadQuery is uniquely suited to our automated parametric modeling pipeline. It elimi-nates mandatory external software dependencies (unlike FreeCAD/OpenSCAD) while retaining Python as its na-tive scripting language—avoiding the proprietary DSL lim-itations of OpenSCAD and the steep learning curve of PythonOCC’s low-level geometric kernel interface. Cad-Query’s key advantage lies in its balance of simplicity and automation readiness: it offers a high-level, intuitive API (matching FreeCAD’s low modeling complexity) without being tethered to a GUI (FreeCAD’s critical limitation for batch processing) or requiring expertise in low-level ge-ometric operations (PythonOCC’s primary barrier). For our use case, programmatic, scalable shape synthesis, Cad-Query’s script-native design (no GUI locks, no external software requirements) and low modeling complexity make it the optimal choice. 

B.2. Modeling Examples 

To illustrate the practical differences in syntax and work-flow for a basic 10×10×10 cube, we provide minimal, exe-cutable code snippets for each tool: 

FreeCAD (GUI-Dependent Python API) FreeCAD re-quires a GUI context and explicit document management, making batch automation cumbersome:                         

> Listing 1. FreeCAD: 10×10×10 Cube Generation
> import FreeCAD, Part #Create anew GUI document doc =FreeCAD.newDocument("Example") #Generate cube geometry box =Part.makeBox(10, 10, 10) #Render in GUI Part.show(box) #Refresh GUI to reflect changes doc.recompute()

OpenSCAD (Proprietary DSL) OpenSCAD uses a cus-tom domain-specific language (DSL) with no native batch automation support:       

> Listing 2. OpenSCAD: 10×10×10 Cube Generation
> // 10x10x10 cube (OpenSCAD DSL) cube([10, 10, 10]);

PythonOCC (Low-Level Python API) PythonOCC re-quires direct interaction with the OpenCASCADE kernel, introducing unnecessary complexity for basic modeling:                               

> Listing 3. PythonOCC: 10×10×10 Cube Generation
> from OCC.Core.BRepPrimAPI import BRepPrimAPI_MakeBox from OCC.Display.SimpleGui import init_display #Create cube geometry box =BRepPrimAPI_MakeBox(10, 10, 10).Shape() #Initialize graphical display display, start_display, _, _=init_display() #Render cube and refresh view display.DisplayShape(box, update=True) #Start display loop start_display()

CadQuery (Script-Native Python API) CadQuery en-ables concise, automation-ready modeling with no external dependencies or GUI locks:          

> Listing 4. CadQuery: 10×10×10 Cube Generation
> import cadquery as cq #Create cube geometry box =cq.Workplane("XY").box(10, 10, 10)

14 （a） （b） （c） （d）   

> GT
> UniCAD Figure 6. Failure cases of CAD reconstruction on DeepCAD dataset. （a）（b）（c）（d）

GT 

UniCAD 

cadr ille 

> Figure 7. Comparison of CAD Reconstruction Results between UniCAD and cadrille.

# C. Subjective A/B Test for Sketch Authenticity 

To verify the authenticity and task practicability of our gen-erated sketches, we conducted a blind A/B test with 8 partic-ipants (3 professional CAD designers and 5 Phd students). Each participant was presented with 100 blind test images, and each image was randomly selected from one of the three sources: a real hand-drawn sketch from Free2CAD, a synthetic sketch generated by UniCAD, and a line draw-ing produced by Canny edge detection. All images were standardized in format with their source information con-cealed. For the rating task, participants were instructed to score each image on a 1–5 Likert scale (1 = Poorest, 5 = Best) in terms of authenticity and correctness. The results show that our synthetic sketches achieved an average au-thenticity score of 4.3/5, which is close to the 4.5/5 score of real hand-drawn sketches and significantly higher than the 1.8/5 score of edge-detected line drawings. 

# D. Qualitative Comparisons 

D.1. Failure Cases 

Figure 6 illustrates several failure cases. For example, in Figure 6(a), the ground truth is a sector-shaped part with a cylindrical hole that is wider at the top and narrower at the bottom, whereas our reconstruction produces a uniformly sized hole. In Figure 6(b), the reconstructed part lacks the chamfer present in the ground truth. In Figure 6(c), the re-constructed part is thinner and misses the closed modeling feature. In Figure 6(d), the hole in the reconstructed part is uniform in diameter, differing from the tapered hole in the ground truth. Nevertheless, our method UniCAD gen-erally produces geometrically plausible shapes, though it still struggles to accurately recover fine-grained geometric details for objects with complex surface structures. Over-all, the reconstructed parts largely preserve the correct geo-metric shape, deviating from the ground truth only in fine-grained details. 15 D.2. Visualization Results 

We compare UniCAD with the previous state-of-the-art method, cadrille [18], on the CAD reconstruction task, presenting the visualization results in Figure 7. UniCAD successfully reconstructs all the models shown in Fig-ure 7, while Cadrille fails to accurately recover several of them. Specifically, in Figure 7(a), the target model is re-constructed as a cuboid with excessive thickness; in Fig-ure 7(b), it erroneously reconstructs the object as a cylin-der; in Figure 7(c), it fails to recover the correct dimensions of the screw component; and in Figure 7(d), both the upper and lower parts of the model are reconstructed as cylindrical structures. The results demonstrate that UniCAD achieves superior CAD reconstruction performance compared with cadrille, particularly in preserving the geometric structures of the target models. More importantly, UniCAD demon-strates stronger sensitivity to dimensional parameters, al-lowing it to more accurately preserve both the scale and size information of reconstructed CAD models. 16