Title: ResiHMR: Residual-Limb Aware Single-Image 3D Human Mesh Recovery for Individuals with Limb Loss

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.28025v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 01:21:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# ResiHMR: Residual-Limb Aware Single-Image 3D Human Mesh Recovery for Individuals with Limb Loss 

# Jiaying Ying ∗1 Heming Du ∗1 Kaihao Zhang 2 Sean M. Tweedy 1 Xin Yu †31The University of Queensland 2Australian National University 3The University of Adelaide 

> ∗

# Equal contributors †Corresponding author 

uqjying@uq.edu.au 

Figure 1. Demonstration of ResiHMR. Our framework recovers anatomically coherent 3D body meshes from a single RGB image by adapting the kinematic topology and explicitly reconstructing residual-limb geometry. 

# Abstract 

Single-image human mesh recovery provides a com-pact 3D, person-centric representation that supports anal-ysis, animation, AR and VR, rehabilitation, and hu-man–computer interaction. However, prevailing systems impose an intact-limb prior and degrade on people with limb loss, because fixed-topology models cannot repre-sent residual limbs. In this work, we present ResiHMR, a residual-limb aware framework for single-image 3D human modeling. ResiHMR adopts residual-limb keypoints and in-troduces two components: (i) a topology-adaptive Resid-ual Anchor-Factor Optimization module that constrains es-timation to the observed kinematic subgraph of anatomi-cally valid structures, and (ii) a geometry-based Residual-Limb Reconstruction module that estimates residual-limb boundaries and convex limb-termination geometry. These components introduce topology-aware optimization and ex-plicit termination geometry as tools for human mesh re-covery under non-standard limb anatomy. Unlike joint-removal methods in a fixed topology, ResiHMR explicitly reconstructs residual-limb surfaces and aligns optimization with limb-loss topology, which better matches prosthetic biomechanics and real-world use. To the best of our knowl-edge, this is the first single-image HMR system that ex-plicitly reconstructs residual-limb surfaces and performs topology-adaptive optimization for individuals with limb loss. On a curated dataset of real-world images with limb loss, ResiHMR improves reconstruction quality under both SMPLify-X and HSMR backbones, reducing intact-joint 2D MPJPE from 41.32 to 37.40 with SMPLify-X and residual-limb 2D MPJPE from 73.61 to 23.19 with HSMR. 

 ResiHMR     

> arXiv:2604.28025v1 [cs.CV] 30 Apr 2026 ResiHMR (Ours) HSMR SMPL ify -XFigure 2. Failure cases of existing HMR methods on individ-uals with limb loss. SMPLify-X and HSMR hallucinate intact limbs or distort the lower body due to their intact-limb priors and fixed kinematic topologies. In contrast, ResiHMR correctly lo-calizes the residual-limb, avoids compensatory distortions, and re-constructs an anatomically coherent body mesh.

# 1. Introduction 

Single image human mesh recovery provides a compact, person centric 3D representation that supports animation and free viewpoint rendering [45, 54], sports analysis [17], and rehabilitation or clinical monitoring [13]. Paramet-ric body models such as SMPL [31] and SMPL X [38] make this practical by providing structured pose and shape spaces for optimization and learning, while HSMR [48] and SKEL [19] target biomechanical interpretability by regress-ing a skeleton designed for physics based simulation. Despite these benefits, existing HMR pipelines inherit an intact-limb assumption from fixed-topology body models and their priors. The skeletal graph, vertex connectivity, and pose priors are defined for able-bodied anatomy, so recon-struction degrades on people with limb loss and cannot rep-resent residual-limb surfaces or anatomically meaningful limb terminations. This causes hallucinated segments and unstable optimization around the amputation site. The af-fected population is large, with global studies reporting tens of millions of people living with traumatic limb amputation and an increasing burden over time [33, 39, 44]. These facts motivate methods that reconstruct residual-limb geometry instead of masking or removing joints and that provide 3D representations suitable for prosthetic alignment, socket as-sessment, gait analysis, and rehabilitation monitoring. As Figure 2 shows, methods that assume intact anatomy mis-handle individuals with limb loss. On a left trans-femoral example, SMPL-X-based fits hallucinate a full thigh and shank. HSMR regresses a full-body biomechani-cal skeleton, so errors around the residual-limb disturb the skeleton and further degrade the reconstruction of intact limbs. To tackle this challenge, we propose ResiHMR, a residual-limb aware single-image framework that recon-structs anatomically coherent meshes for people with limb loss. To the best of our knowledge, ResiHMR is the first system that explicitly models residual-limb surfaces and adapts optimization to limb-loss topology, rather than pre-serving a fixed full-limb graph. This design targets common cases in prosthetics and rehabilitation in which the quality of the limb-termination geometry matters. ResiHMR uses residual-limb keypoints [52] within HMR and introduces two components. Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization component constrains estimation to anatomically valid kinematic subgraphs, which reduces spurious joint regression on absent limbs and stabilizes op-timization near the amputation site. Residual-Limb Re-construction component predicts residual-limb boundaries and smooth, convex stump surfaces, giving interpretable residual-limb length and physically plausible termination geometry. Because the residuum interacts with the socket to bear load and transmit control, and this interface is cen-tral to comfort, fit, and function in clinical biomechanics, explicit stump geometry allows ResiHMR to better match prosthetic biomechanics and to provide residual-limb aware 3D representations that support prosthetists, rehabilitation clinicians, and researchers in real workflows. We evaluate ResiHMR on a curated LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset with 2D residual-limb and intact key-points and pixel masks. We compare against the recent HMR methods. We report 2D reprojected mesh error, 2D joint error on intact joints, 2D residual-endpoint localiza-tion error, and silhouette consistency in the form of mask IoU. ResiHMR reduces 2D mesh error, improves residual-endpoint alignment, and yields more anatomically coherent stump geometry in qualitative results. This work makes the following contributions: • We propose ResiHMR, a single image residual-limb aware HMR framework that reconstructs anatomically coherent 3D human meshes for people with limb loss by explicitly modeling residual-limb surfaces and adapting optimization to limb loss topology. • We introduce a Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization component and a Residual-Limb Reconstruction compo-nent that estimate residual-limb boundaries and convex termination geometry. • We provide a topology adaptive residual-limb aware 3D body representation that better matches prosthetic biome-chanics and supports prosthetic alignment, rehabilitation, and mobility analysis on a curated LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset. 2. Related Work 

2.1. Human Body Models 

Parametric human body models provide a compact, control-lable representation of shape and articulation. Early models such as SCAPE [1] learned pose-dependent deformations from 3D scans, while SMPL [31] introduced a differen-tiable, low-dimensional body model that has become central to vision and graphics. Subsequent extensions model spe-cific regions, including MANO for hands [40], FLAME for face [25], and SMPL-X [38] unifies body, hands, and face within a single expressive mesh. Recent work improves re-alism and population coverage: SKEL [19] incorporates a biomechanically grounded skeleton, SMPLer-X [4] scales whole-body modeling to large datasets, STAR [35] en-hances pose-dependent deformation, GHUM [51] intro-duces a generative articulated prior, and Anny [3] expands demographic diversity. While appearance driven reconstruction approaches such as NeRFs [15, 34, 41], implicit SDF models [6, 36], and 4D Gaussian splatting [47] produce highly realistic geom-etry but lack anatomical structure such as joints, kinematic chains, or interpretable limb measurements. Hybrid meth-ods such as ICON [49], SiTH [14], and ECON [50] preserve SMPL controllability while refining surface detail, but they still assume intact-limb topology. However, despite covering broader shape variation and more realistic articulation, all existing parametric body models assume intact limb topology in both mesh represen-tation and kinematic chain structure, making them unable to represent residual-limb geometry. 

2.2. Single-Image Human Mesh Recovery 

Single-image 3D human mesh recovery has advanced rapidly in recent years. Classical optimization-based meth-ods such as SMPLify [2] and SMPLify-X [38] fit a para-metric model to 2D keypoints using strong pose and shape priors, but inference is slow and sensitive to keypoint noise. Regression-based approaches predict model param-eters directly from images, beginning with HMR [18] and HMR2.0 [12], and later refined through in-the-loop opti-mization (SPIN [21]), occlusion reasoning (PARE [20]), improved camera modeling (CLIFF [26]), and iterative alignment modules (PyMAF-X [53], ProHMR [22]). Hy-brid analytical–neural methods such as HybrIK [23] and HybrIK-X [24] integrate differentiable inverse kinemat-ics for more accurate rotations, while transformer-based whole-body models (MeshGraphormer [28], METRO [29], SMPLer-X [4], OSX [27]) further push reconstruction fidelity. PHYS-HMR [11] augments visual cues with physics-based humanoid control to improve motion realism. Despite these advances, all methods assume an intact-limb topology inherited from SMPL [31]/SMPL-X [38]. 

3D Human Modeling for Individual with Disabilities 

The applicability of 3D human body models to individu-als with limb loss remains underexplored. Clinical studies show that residual-limb geometry is essential for prosthetic design, rehabilitation, and gait assessment [5, 9], highlight-ing the need for anatomically grounded models. Recently, AJAHR 1 [8] introduces joint-existence predic-tion for amputee-aware SMPL fitting. However, it still re-lies on intact SMPL topology, yielding stump locations at intact joints due to missing residual-limb endpoints. The associated A3D and ITW-Amputee datasets annotate joint presence but lack anatomical residual-limb endpoints, lead-ing reconstructed limbs to terminate at the nearest intact SMPL joint rather than at the observed stump. LDPose [52] complements this direction by introducing a 2D keypoint system for individuals with limb loss, defining residual limb endpoints at the image level. However, it does not include 3D supervision or a parametric body representation. As a result, no existing method or dataset supports anatomically grounded 3D reconstruction for individuals with limb loss, where residual-limbs are explicitly modeled rather than implicitly shortened. Our work provides the first residual-limb–aware extension of parametric single-image 3D reconstruction. 

# 3. ResiHMR Framework 

We propose ResiHMR , a residual-limb aware 3D human mesh recovery framework that estimates anatomically co-herent meshes from a single RGB image. ResiHMR is a fully optimization-based framework and does not require any training dataset. Given an image and whole-body 2D keypoints in the LDPose format, ResiHMR first fits a SMPL-X model [38] to intact keypoints, then applies a 

Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization module to adapt the kinematic graph and a geometry-based Residual-Limb Reconstruction module to remove distal limb geometry and generate a smooth, convex, watertight stump surface, as illustrated in Figure 3. 

3.1. Preliminaries 

SMPL-X and Parameterized Backbones. We build upon SMPL-X [38], a differentiable parametric model of the body, hands, and face that represents humans as a de-formable mesh driven by a kinematic skeleton. As our primary optimization backbone, we adopt SMPLify-X due to its explicit and interpretable formulation, which opti-mizes camera, pose, and shape parameters through mod-ular objectives and accommodates additional supervision         

> 1At the time of submission, the official implementation of AJAHR was not publicly released, preventing a fair and reproducible comparison. We therefore do not include AJAHR in our experimental evaluation. Addi-tional discussion appears in the Supplementary Material. Output
> Residual A nchor -Factor
> Optimization
> Residual Limb
> Reconstruction
> Back View Side View Bottom View 2D keypoints
> Input Image
> SMPL ify -X
> Camera π
> Shape β
> Pose q Figure 3. Overview of our ResiHMR framework. Given an input image, SMPL-X is initialized using intact 2D keypoints. Our Residual Anchor–Factor Optimization adapts the kinematic graph by refining anchor joints and residual-limb proportions under supervision of residual-limb 2D keypoints. The Residual-Limb Reconstruction module then removes distal limb geometry and generates a smooth, watertight stump surface, producing anatomically realistic residual-limb aware meshes.

and constraints. However, SMPL-X assumes fixed intact-limb topology with full-limb kinematic chains. When di-rectly fitted to residual-limb keypoints, it tends to halluci-nate missing distal segments and place residual endpoints at the nearest intact joint, leading to anatomically incorrect meshes and unstable optimization near the limb termina-tion. More importantly, our framework is not restricted to SMPLify-X. ResiHMR is compatible with any HMR pipeline that outputs SMPL-X parameters (camera, pose, and shape), including both optimization-based and regression-based methods. Our formulation operates directly on the parameter space and kinematic structure, enabling flexible incorporation of residual-limb keypoints, anchor redefinition, and amputation-aware constraints. This design makes ResiHMR a plug-in module for existing HMR systems, extending them to support anatomically coherent reconstruction for individuals with limb loss. 

LDPose. To represent individuals with limb loss, we use the LDPose [52] keypoint schema 2, which augments intact 2D body keypoints with eight residual-limb endpoints. LDPose provides 2D keypoints, so reconstructing a 3D residual limb requires adapting SMPL-X kinematics to limb absence. 

3.2. Problem Definition 

Our goal is to lift 2D residual-limb endpoints into anatom-ically meaningful 3D limb terminations while keeping global pose and body proportions consistent with intact key-

> 2For more details, please refer to Figure 2 of LDPose

points. The reconstructed mesh should respect the SMPL-X skeletal hierarchy and give each residual limb an explicit 3D geometry instead of implicitly shortening or omitting it. Given a single RGB image I ∈ RH×W ×3 and detected 2D keypoints K2D = {(xi, y i, c i)}N +Mi=1 , we reconstruct a 3D human mesh that represents both intact parts and residual-limbs. Each keypoint (xi, y i) is a pixel coordi-nate with confidence ci. We use OpenPose [7] WholeBody keypoints Kintact  

> 2D

= {(xj , y j , c j )}Nj=1 with N = 135 body, hand, and face keypoints and extend them with residual-limb keypoints Kresidual  

> 2D

= {(xj , y j , c j )}Mj=1 with M = 8 

following LDPose [52]. We estimate the parameters of a SMPL-X model Θ = {θ, β, ψ, R, t, λ r }, where θ, β, and 

ψ are pose, shape, and expression, R ∈ SO(3) and t ∈ R3

are global rotation and translation, and λr ∈ [0 , 1] encodes a proportional residual-limb length factor along the kinematic chain. The resulting mesh Mr (Θ) should combine intact and residual geometry in an anatomically coherent way. 

3.3. Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization 

We build on SMPLify-X [38] as our primary optimization backbone. The optimization-based formulation adapts more easily to unseen body topologies such as limb loss and it keeps full access to SMPL-X pose and shape parameters, which we later use for explicit geometry editing. In the ex-periments and supplementary material, we further demon-strate that ResiHMR can also be built on alternative HMR backbones, such as the regression-based HSMR model. We first use intact keypoints Kintact  

> 2D

to initialize SMPL-X camera, pose, and shape following the standard SMPLify-X objective: 

min  

> θ,β,t

Edata + Eprior , (1) where the data term matches projected joints to detected keypoints: 

Edata = X

> i

wi π(Ji) − k2Di 

> 2

, (2) and Eprior regularizes pose and shape with learned priors. Here Ji are 3D joints and k2Di are detected intact keypoints. Residual keypoints Kresidual  

> 2D

and the SMPLify-X initial-ization (θ, β, π) define the Residual Anchor Factor Opti-mization stage. For each residual-limb we jointly optimize an anchor joint position Ja and a residual length factor 

λr ∈ [0 , 1] . The anchor joint is the distal joint at the base of the amputated limb, for example the knee or elbow. The factor λr specifies where the limb terminates on the line from Ja to its upstream joint Jt. We follow anthropomet-ric findings [5, 9] that intact segment lengths correlate with residual-limb length and we therefore keep the intact limb length from SMPLify-X as a prior while only adjusting the termination point. 

Residual representation. We represent each residual-limb 

r by an endpoint that lies on the kinematic line segment between the proximal anchor joint and its upstream joint. Concretely, we define 

Rr = Ja + λr (Jt − Ja), (3) where Ja is the anchor joint, Jt is its upstream joint, and 

λr ∈ [0 , 1] encodes the remaining limb proportion. A value 

λr = 0 corresponds to an intact limb and λr = 1 indicates complete removal. This linear interpolation yields a low-dimensional and anatomically grounded parameterization of the residual-limb. It ties the endpoint to the underlying kinematic chain, preserves the direction of the original limb segment, and lets the optimizer adjust residual-limb length through a single factor while keeping the global skeleton structure consistent with SMPL-X. 

Loss function and optimization. For each visible residual keypoint we optimize (Ja, λ r ) with 

L = Lreproj + α Lreg + μ Llen , (4) where α and μ are adaptively scaled based on the initial fit-ting error for each instances. The reprojection loss enforces 2D consistency between the residual endpoint and its ob-servation, with Lreproj = ∥π(Rr ) − k2Dr ∥2. The regularizer penalizes large anchor motion away from the SMPLify-X estimate, Lreg = ∥Ja − Jinit  

> a

∥2, so that intact joints remain close to the original kinematic structure. The length term preserves the limb length given by SMPLify-X and encodes anthropometric priors, 

Llen =  ∥Jt − Ja∥ − Jt − Jinit 

> a

2 , (5) 

Algorithm 1: Residual Anchor–Factor Optimiza-tion 

Input: Initial anchor joint Jinit  

> a

, target joint Jt,residual 2D keypoint k2D , camera π(·)

Output: Optimized anchor J∗ 

> a

and residual factor 

λ∗

Initialize Ja ← Jinit  

> a

, λ ← 0.5

for i = 1 to N (L-BFGS iterations) do 

λ ← clip( λ, λ min , λ max )

R = Ja + λ · (Jt − Ja)

r2D = π(R)

Lreproj = ∥r2D − k2D ∥2

Lreg = ∥Ja − Jinit  

> a

∥2

Llen =  ∥Jt − Ja∥ − ∥ Jt − Jinit  

> a

∥2

L = Lreproj + αLreg + μLlen 

(Ja, λ ) ← L-BFGS-step (Ja, λ, ∇L )

return J∗ 

> a

= Ja, λ ∗ = λ

which encourages biomechanically reasonable residual seg-ments. We use L-BFGS [30] with strong Wolfe line search. We optimize each residual-limb independently and accept the solution if the residual endpoint reprojection error is below a threshold, which is 15 pixels in practice. The procedure of Residual Anchor–Factor Optimization for a single residual-limb is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

3.4. Residual-Limb Reconstruction 

Given the optimized anchor joints and residual length fac-tors (J⋆a, λ ⋆r ) from the Residual Anchor Factor Optimiza-tion stage and the SMPL-X mesh M = ( V, F), we modify the mesh to remove distal limb geometry and construct an explicit stump surface. For each residual-limb r we first compute a 3D cut point: 

pr = J⋆a + λ⋆r

 Jinit  

> t

− J⋆a

, (6) where Jinit  

> t

is the upstream joint in the original SMPL-X skeleton. All subsequent operations are restricted to the cor-responding limb submesh. 

Segmentation guided coarse pruning. We apply a SMPL-X body parts segmentation and remove distal part labels for the residual-limb, for example forearm and hand or foot, to obtain a coarse distal mask. This step discards vertices that clearly lie beyond the intended residual segment and reduces the search space for the subsequent geometric cut. 

Fine geometric cutting. Within the preserved segment re-gion, for example upper arm or thigh, we identify the face nearest to pr and grow a connected vertex ring inside a nar-row band around a cut plane. We define the plane normal: Figure 4. Dataset Demonstration of the proposed LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset. Representative samples illustrating the diversity of subjects, amputation levels, poses, activities, and environments included in the dataset. Green overlays indicate the manually annotated body masks used to isolate the human body region. 

ˆn = J⋆a − Jinit 

> t

J⋆a − Jinit 

> t

. (7) For each vertex v in the kept region we compute the signed distance ϕ(v) = ⟨v − pr , ˆn⟩. Vertices with ϕ(v) above a small margin that are not part of the protective ring are treated as distal geometry and removed. This procedure yields a smooth intersection contour and is robust to local surface irregularities and mesh noise. 

Boundary cleanup and sealing. We extract boundary ver-tices, that is edges with multiplicity one, and iteratively prune low degree boundary vertices to remove spurious spikes. We then fit a local plane and generate two concen-tric vertex rings with small offsets ±h along the plane nor-mal. Triangulation between the boundary and these rings produces a smooth, convex, watertight stump surface. The resulting mesh Mr (Θ) remains closed and is visually con-sistent with limb termination anatomy. This reconstruction stage uses the residual parameters in-ferred in the previous optimization stage to drive explicit mesh editing, so the final meshes have anatomically mean-ingful stump geometry that is suitable for clinical assess-ment, prosthetic alignment, and downstream analysis. 

3.5. LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset 

To evaluate ResiHMR and support future work on single image mesh recovery for people with limb loss, we con-struct the LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset, a curated subset of LDPose [52] with extended annotations. The dataset contains 255 images that cover diverse upper and lower limb loss configurations, amputation levels, residual-limb lengths, activities, and backgrounds with limited self occlusion. Each image includes 2D annotations of 17 stan-dard body keypoints and 8 residual-limb endpoints, and we add per person segmentation masks to isolate the human re-gion and reduce the influence of clothing, hair, prosthetic devices, and other objects. For partially occluded sub-jects we estimate missing body regions from visible con-text to keep anatomical completeness, and for each residual-limb we annotate the termination segment based on LDPose residual keypoints and visual inspection. Figure 4 illustrates examples, and full dataset statistics appear in the Supple-mentary Material. 

# 4. Experiments 

4.1. Evaluation Protocol 

Baselines. We evaluate ResiHMR on the LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset with two baselines: SMPLify-X [38], an optimization-based SMPL-X fit-ting method, and HSMR [48], a recent regression-based model that uses a biomechanically informed SKEL rep-resentation and HMR2.0 training [12]. Together, these methods cover both optimization and regression paradigms for single-image HMR. Intact keypoints correspond to the 25 standard OpenPose body keypoints [7]. Residual limbs are referred to 8 residual endpoints defined in [52]. Accord-ingly, we report three metrics evaluating: (i) intact-body structure (25 keypoints), (ii) the full anatomical keypoint set (33 keypoints), and (iii) residual-limb termination geometry (8 keypoints). 

Evaluation metrics. We report two metrics, 2D MPJPE and mIoU, to jointly assess structural accuracy and silhou-ette agreement. 2D MPJPE is the mean per-joint reprojec-tion error between mesh joints and ground-truth 2D key-points, which we compute separately for intact body joints, residual-limb endpoints, and intact limb joints. mIoU is the mean intersection-over-union between a binary mask rendered from the reconstructed mesh and the manually annotated body mask. Together, these metrics measure alignment between the recovered mesh and the observed anatomy in the image plane and the plausibility of the over-all body silhouette for individuals with limb loss. 

4.2. Quantitative Results 

Table 1 reports results on the LDPose-LimbLoss Evalua-tion Dataset. Existing HMR methods assume intact-limb Input Image  Mesh  Front View  Back View  Side View  T-Pose View Figure 5. Qualitative Evaluation of ResiHMR. For each input example, we show: (a) the input image, (b) the overlay of SMPL-X in the input view, (c) front view, (d) back view, (e) side view, (f) T-Pose view with model output Θ = {β, ψ, R, t, λ r } and mr = { mk | vk =(xk , y k , z k , m k ) ∈ Vr }, and (c) (d) (e) and (f) all have residual limb being highlighted in red. topology and do not explicitly predict residual-limb end-points or stump geometry. Therefore, for all non-ResiHMR baselines, residual-limb accuracy is evaluated using a naive midpoint proxy on the corresponding limb segment under a unified protocol. ResiHMR improves over both backbones. Under the SMPLify-X backbone, it reduces Body Kpts MPJPE from 47.67 px to 41.77 px, Res-Limb MPJPE from 129.59 px to 98.36 px, and Intact Kpts MPJPE from 41.32 px to 37.40 px, while increasing mIoU from 0.662 to 0.703. When com-bined with HSMR, ResiHMR further reduces Body Kpts MPJPE from 28.27 px to 24.75 px and Res-Limb MPJPE from 73.61 px to 23.19 px, and improves mIoU from 0.705 to 0.741, while maintaining comparable Intact Kpts accu-racy (24.56 vs. 24.87 px). 3 Across all methods, ResiHMR (HSMR) achieves the best Body Kpts and Res-Limb results, while CameraHMR attains the highest mIoU (0.752). These results show that topology-adaptive optimization reduces the distortions caused by forcing intact-limb mod-els to explain missing distal anatomy, leading to better global body alignment. More importantly, ResiHMR is the only method that explicitly models residual-limb end-points rather than relying on a fixed midpoint proxy, which explains its large advantage on residual-limb localization. The remaining error mainly comes from imperfect ini-tialization and the large image-scale variation in the 255-image dataset, which amplifies pixel-based MPJPE. Over-all, ResiHMR substantially improves residual-limb recon-struction while preserving competitive performance on in-tact anatomy and silhouette quality. 

4.3. Qualitative Results 

Figure 2 compares ResiHMR with SMPLify-X and HSMR. Because both baselines assume intact limbs, they often hallucinate missing distal segments or collapse the ampu-tated limb into implausible shapes. In HSMR, the full-limb prior can also distort the contralateral leg when a pros-thesis or short residual limb is present. By contrast, Re-siHMR follows the observed residual-limb endpoints and removes unsupported distal geometry, yielding more stable and anatomically coherent poses. Figure 5 further shows that across diverse subjects, poses, and amputation levels, ResiHMR consistently re-covers plausible global pose, accurate residual-limb loca-tion and length, and smooth watertight stump surfaces from multiple views. These qualitative results match the quan-titative findings: unlike existing HMR methods, ResiHMR explicitly models residual limbs and resolves the character-istic failure mode of hallucinated full limbs and distorted contralateral joints.                                    

> 3ResiHMR under HSMR backbone will be detailed in the project page.
> Table 1. Comparison of recent HMR methods and ResiHMR under either SMPLify-X or HSMR as backbone. Best results are shown in bold. For all other HMR methods, as they do not explicitly predict residual-limb endpoints, we define a naive mid-point proxy on the corresponding limb segment to enable consis-tent scoring under a unified protocol.
> Method 2D MPJPE ↓mIoU ↑
> Body Kpts Res-Limb Intact Kpts TokenHMR [CVPR24] [10] 34.79 102.34 31.73 0.717 CameraHMR [3DV25] [37] 29.26 78.13 25.56 0.752
> PromptHMR [CVPR25] [43] 51.07 102.48 46.88 0.751 HSMR [CVPR25] [48] 28.27 73.61 24.56 0.705 SMPLify-X [CVPR19] [38] 47.67 129.59 41.32 0.662 ResiHMR (SMPLify-X) 41.77 98.36 37.40 0.703 ResiHMR (HSMR) 24.75 23.19 24.87 0.741

# 5. Future Work 

ResiHMR opens two main directions for future work. First, the field still lacks ground-truth 3D datasets for people with limb loss, and calibrated multi-view or marker-based cap-ture would enable stronger supervision and standardized evaluation. Second, learning residual-limb priors directly from data, for example with generative or diffusion models of stump geometry, soft tissue, and limb–socket interfaces, could improve anatomical realism while reducing reliance on optimization. More broadly, we view ResiHMR as a foundation for inclusive human modeling in graphics, vi-sion, rehabilitation, and accessible healthcare. 

# 6. Conclusion 

We presented ResiHMR, a single-image residual-limb-aware 3D human mesh recovery framework that explic-itly modeled residual-limb anatomy instead of relying on fixed intact-limb topology. ResiHMR combined a topology-adaptive Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization component with a Residual-Limb Reconstruction component to pro-duce anatomically coherent meshes and residual-limb-aware 3D body representations that better matched pros-thetic biomechanics. On the curated LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset, ResiHMR improved intact-joint 2D MPJPE from 41.32 to 37.40 pixels and mask mIoU from 0.662 to 0.703 under the SMPLify-X backbone, and re-duced residual-limb 2D MPJPE from 73.61 to 23.19 under the HSMR backbone, while remaining the only method that localized residual-limb endpoints. These results showed the value of amputation-aware kinematics and geometry for in-clusive 3D human digitization and indicated new opportu-nities in prosthetics, rehabilitation, and accessible human-computer interaction. Acknowledgement 

This research is funded in part by ARC-Discovery grant (DP220100800 to XY) and ARC-DECRA grant (DE230100477 to XY). We sincerely thank The Ad-vance Queensland Industry Research Projects (AQIRP) for their invaluable support and guidance throughout the development of this work. We thank all anony-mous reviewers and ACs for their constructive suggestions. 

# References 

[1] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Se-bastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis. Scape: shape completion and animation of people. In ACM Siggraph 2005 Papers , pages 408–416. 2005. 3 [2] Federica Bogo, Angjoo Kanazawa, Christoph Lassner, Peter Gehler, Javier Romero, and Michael J. Black. Keep it SMPL: Automatic estimation of 3D human pose and shape from a single image. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2016 . Springer International Publishing, 2016. 3 [3] Romain Br´ egier, Gu´ enol´ e Fiche, Laura Bravo-S´ anchez, Thomas Lucas, Matthieu Armando, Philippe Weinzaepfel, Gr´ egory Rogez, and Fabien Baradel. Human mesh modeling for anny body. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03589 , 2025. 3 [4] Zhongang Cai, Wanqi Yin, Ailing Zeng, Chen Wei, Qing-ping Sun, Wang Yanjun, Hui En Pang, Haiyi Mei, Mingyuan Zhang, Lei Zhang, et al. Smpler-x: Scaling up expressive human pose and shape estimation. Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , 36:11454–11468, 2023. 3 [5] Alicia Canda. Stature estimation from body segment lengths in young adults—application to people with physical disabil-ities. Journal of physiological anthropology , 28(2):71–82, 2009. 3, 5 [6] Yukang Cao, Guanying Chen, Kai Han, Wenqi Yang, and Kwan-Yee K Wong. Jiff: Jointly-aligned implicit face func-tion for high quality single view clothed human reconstruc-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2729–2739, 2022. 3 [7] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo Martinez, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. A. Sheikh. Openpose: Realtime multi-person 2d pose estima-tion using part affinity fields. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2019. 4, 6 [8] Hyunjin Cho, Giyun Choi, and Jongwon Choi. Ajahr: Am-putated joint aware 3d human mesh recovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 7925–7935, 2025. 3, 1, 2 [9] MJ Connick, E Beckman, T Ibusuki, L Malone, and SM Tweedy. Evaluation of methods for calculating maximum allowable standing height in amputees competing in p ara-lympic athletics. Scandinavian journal of medicine & sci-ence in sports , 26(11):1353–1359, 2016. 3, 5 [10] Sai Kumar Dwivedi, Yu Sun, Priyanka Patel, Yao Feng, and Michael J. Black. TokenHMR: Advancing human mesh re-covery with a tokenized pose representation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 8 [11] Qiao Feng, Yiming Huang, Yufu Wang, Jiatao Gu, and Lingjie Liu. Physhmr: Learning humanoid control policies from vision for physically plausible human motion recon-struction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02566 , 2025. 3 [12] Shubham Goel, Georgios Pavlakos, Jathushan Rajasegaran, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Jitendra Malik. Humans in 4d: Re-constructing and tracking humans with transformers. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14783–14794, 2023. 3, 6, 1 [13] Hengtao Guo, Benjamin Planche, Meng Zheng, Srikrishna Karanam, Terrence Chen, and Ziyan Wu. Smpl-a: Model-ing person-specific deformable anatomy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 20814–20823, 2022. 2 [14] I Ho, Jie Song, Otmar Hilliges, et al. Sith: Single-view tex-tured human reconstruction with image-conditioned diffu-sion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 538–549, 2024. 3[15] Shoukang Hu, Fangzhou Hong, Liang Pan, Haiyi Mei, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Sherf: Generalizable human nerf from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 9352–9364, 2023. 3 [16] Catalin Ionescu, Dragos Papava, Vlad Olaru, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Human3.6m: Large scale datasets and predic-tive methods for 3d human sensing in natural environments. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence , 36(7):1325–1339, 2014. 1 [17] Tianjian Jiang, Johsan Billingham, Sebastian M¨ uksch, Juan Zarate, Nicolas Evans, Martin R Oswald, Marc Polleyfeys, Otmar Hilliges, Manuel Kaufmann, and Jie Song. World-pose: A world cup dataset for global 3d human pose esti-mation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 343–362. Springer, 2024. 2 [18] Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J. Black, David W. Jacobs, and Jitendra Malik. End-to-end recovery of human shape and pose. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2018. 3 [19] Marilyn Keller, Keenon Werling, Soyong Shin, Scott Delp, Sergi Pujades, C Karen Liu, and Michael J Black. From skin to skeleton: Towards biomechanically accurate 3d dig-ital humans. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6): 1–12, 2023. 2, 3 [20] Muhammed Kocabas, Chun-Hao P Huang, Otmar Hilliges, and Michael J Black. Pare: Part attention regressor for 3d human body estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 11127– 11137, 2021. 3 [21] Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, Michael J Black, and Kostas Daniilidis. Learning to reconstruct 3d human pose and shape via model-fitting in the loop. In ICCV , 2019. 3 [22] Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Kostas Daniilidis. Probabilistic modeling for human mesh recovery. In ICCV , 2021. 3 [23] Jiefeng Li, Chao Xu, Zhicun Chen, Siyuan Bian, Lixin Yang, and Cewu Lu. Hybrik: A hybrid analytical-neural inverse kinematics solution for 3d human pose and shape estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3383–3393, 2021. 3 [24] Jiefeng Li, Siyuan Bian, Chao Xu, Zhicun Chen, Lixin Yang, and Cewu Lu. Hybrik-x: Hybrid analytical-neural inverse kinematics for whole-body mesh recovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05690 , 2023. 3 [25] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael. J. Black, Hao Li, and Javier Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and ex-pression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 36(6):194:1–194:17, 2017. 3 [26] Zhihao Li, Jianzhuang Liu, Zhensong Zhang, Songcen Xu, and Youliang Yan. Cliff: Carrying location information in full frames into human pose and shape estimation. In ECCV ,2022. 3 [27] Jing Lin, Ailing Zeng, Haoqian Wang, Lei Zhang, and Yu Li. One-stage 3d whole-body mesh recovery with component aware transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21159–21168, 2023. 3 [28] Kevin Lin, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu. Mesh graphormer. In ICCV , 2021. 3 [29] Kevin Lin, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu. End-to-end hu-man pose and mesh reconstruction with transformers. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1954–1963, 2021. 3 [30] Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization. Mathematical program-ming , 45(1):503–528, 1989. 5 [31] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A skinned multi-person linear model. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries, Volume 2 , pages 851–866. 2023. 2, 3 [32] Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F Troje, Ger-ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 5442–5451, 2019. 1 [33] Cody L. McDonald, Sarah Westcott-McCoy, Marcia R. Weaver, Juanita Haagsma, and Deborah Kartin. Global prevalence of traumatic non-fatal limb amputation. Prosthet-ics and Orthotics International , 45(2):105–114, 2021. 2 [34] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-thesis. Communications of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. 3[35] Ahmed AA Osman, Timo Bolkart, and Michael J Black. Star: Sparse trained articulated human body regressor. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 598–613. Springer, 2020. 3 [36] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning con-tinuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 165–174, 2019. 3 [37] Priyanka Patel and Michael J. Black. CameraHMR: Aligning people with perspective. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2025. 8 [38] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10975–10985, 2019. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 [39] Julio A. Rivera, Kara Churovich, Ashley B. Anderson, and Benjamin K. Potter. Estimating recent US limb loss preva-lence and updating future projections. Archives of Reha-bilitation Research and Clinical Translation , 6(4):100376, 2024. 2 [40] Javier Romero, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. Embodied hands: Modeling and capturing hands and bod-ies together. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIG-GRAPH Asia) , 36(6), 2017. 3 [41] Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollh¨ ofer, and Helge Rhodin. A-nerf: Articulated neural radiance fields for learn-ing human shape, appearance, and pose. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:12278–12291, 2021. 3 [42] Shashank Tripathi, Lea M¨ uller, Chun-Hao P. Huang, Taheri Omid, Michael J. Black, and Dimitrios Tzionas. 3D human pose estimation via intuitive physics. In Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 4713– 4725, 2023. 1 [43] Yufu Wang, Yu Sun, Priyanka Patel, Kostas Daniilidis, Michael J Black, and Muhammed Kocabas. Prompthmr: Promptable human mesh recovery. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 8 [44] Baixing Wei, Jie Zhang, Yuanpei Cheng, and Han Wu. Global, regional and national burden of traumatic amputa-tions from 1990 to 2021: a systematic analysis of the global burden of disease study 2021. Frontiers in Public Health ,13:1583523, 2025. 2 [45] Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Hu-mannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern Recognition , pages 16210–16220, 2022. 2 [46] Keenon Werling, Nicholas A Bianco, Michael Raitor, Jon Stingel, Jennifer L Hicks, Steven H Collins, Scott L Delp, and C Karen Liu. Addbiomechanics: Automating model scaling, inverse kinematics, and inverse dynamics from hu-man motion data through sequential optimization. Plos one ,18(11):e0295152, 2023. 1 [47] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 20310–20320, 2024. 3 [48] Yan Xia, Xiaowei Zhou, Etienne Vouga, Qixing Huang, and Georgios Pavlakos. Reconstructing humans with a biome-chanically accurate skeleton. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5355–5365, 2025. 2, 6, 8, 1 [49] Yuliang Xiu, Jinlong Yang, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Icon: Implicit clothed humans obtained from nor-mals. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 13286–13296. IEEE, 2022. 3 [50] Yuliang Xiu, Jinlong Yang, Xu Cao, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Econ: Explicit clothed humans optimized via normal integration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 512–523, 2023. 3, 1 [51] Hongyi Xu, Eduard Gabriel Bazavan, Andrei Zanfir, William T Freeman, Rahul Sukthankar, and Cristian Smin-chisescu. Ghum & ghuml: Generative 3d human shape and articulated pose models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 6184–6193, 2020. 3 [52] Jiaying Ying, Heming Du, Kaihao Zhang, Lincheng Li, and Xin Yu. Ldpose: Towards inclusive human pose estimation for limb-deficient individuals in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 9865–9875, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 6 [53] Hongwen Zhang, Yating Tian, Yuxiang Zhang, Mengcheng Li, Liang An, Zhenan Sun, and Yebin Liu. Pymaf-x: To-wards well-aligned full-body model regression from monoc-ular images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-chine Intelligence , 2023. 3 [54] Shenhao Zhu, Junming Leo Chen, Zuozhuo Dai, Zilong Dong, Yinghui Xu, Xun Cao, Yao Yao, Hao Zhu, and Siyu Zhu. Champ: Controllable and consistent human image an-imation with 3d parametric guidance. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 145–162. Springer, 2024. 2ResiHMR: Residual-Limb Aware Single-Image 3D Human Mesh Recovery for Individuals with Limb Loss 

# Supplementary Material 

# 7. Broader Impact 

Our work aims to advance accessibility and disability inclu-sion in computer vision by enabling anatomically valid 3D human modeling for individuals with limb loss, an under-represented population in existing HMR datasets [16, 32, 42, 46] and methods [12, 48, 50]. By explicitly reconstructing residual-limb geometry and adapting kinematic structure to limb-loss topology, Re-siHMR offers a step toward more equitable and accessi-ble 3D human modeling for applications that extend be-yond graphics and pose estimation. The potential positive outcomes extend beyond graphics or pose estimation. Ac-curate residual-limb geometry is relevant to prosthetic de-sign, rehabilitation assessment, parasport classification, and human-centered AI technologies that must account for bod-ies with varied physical structures. Our method offers a technical foundation that may support these domains when applied responsibly and in collaboration with clinical or biomechanics experts. At the same time, modeling real people, particularly in-dividuals with limb loss, requires careful ethical considera-tion. Residual-limb data may be sensitive, and any down-stream clinical or biomechanical use should involve appro-priate oversight, domain experts, and consent. Our method does not infer medical diagnoses nor replace clinical assess-ment; instead, it provides a technical capability that may complement future accessible technologies when used re-sponsibly. Our work also highlights the broader need for inclusive datasets, evaluation protocols, and modeling assumptions in human-centric AI. We hope it encourages the community to consider disability inclusion as a core component of fair and responsible human modeling, ultimately contributing to AI systems that serve a wider and more diverse range of users. 

# 8. Importance of Residual-Limb Modeling 

From the perspective of parasport science, clinical biome-chanics, and disability-movement analysis, incorporating the residual limb as an explicit component of the human body model is not merely beneficial, it is essential. The residual limb is an active, load-bearing, and dynamically expressive structure that influences posture, balance con-trol, segment coordination, socket alignment, compensatory strategies, and whole-body movement organization. Ignor-ing or collapsing this structure, as in methods that hal-lucinate intact limbs (e.g., HSMR [48]) or truncate ge-ometry to the nearest joint (e.g., AJAHR [8]), fundamen-tally distorts the underlying anatomy and removes infor-mation that is critical for understanding how amputee ath-letes actually move. Residual-limb length, orientation, and stump-surface geometry directly shape gait kinemat-ics, limb-loading asymmetries, and upper and lower body coordination factors central to parasport classification, per-formance evaluation, and prosthetic design. In contrast, ResiHMR reconstructs the residual limb as a first-class anatomical entity, producing continuous termi-nation points and watertight stump surfaces that correspond to the individual’s true morphology. This explicit treatment enables anatomically faithful 3D meshes that retain clini-cally meaningful geometry rather than simplified joint-level surrogates. As a result, ResiHMR provides not only more accurate reconstructions but also scientifically interpretable models that align with real-world biomechanics. This ca-pability is indispensable for inclusive human-pose research and positions our work as the first step toward anatomically grounded and clinically relevant 3D mesh recovery for in-dividuals with limb loss. 

# 9. AJAHR vs. ResiHMR 

Amputated Joint Aware HMR (AJAHR) [8] introduces BPAC-Net, which classifies amputated body regions from images and 2D keypoints, and an AJAHR-Tokenizer, a VQ-VAE–style pose tokenizer trained on large-scale intact-body pose datasets together with a synthetic amputee dataset (A3D). In A3D, amputations are generated by modifying SMPL pose parameters: the pose of an amputated joint and all its descendants is zeroed, and the SMPL skinning func-tion collapses distal vertices toward the parent joint. This representation preserves the original SMPL kinematic tree and restricts amputations to occur strictly at existing joint locations. Consequently, AJAHR cannot localize anatomi-cal residual-limb endpoints and produces no stump surface. Instead, the distal mesh simply converges to the nearest in-tact joint. The supervision in AJAHR, including its amputee training data, therefore reflects only joint-level amputations and lacks ground-truth residual-limb geometry. As a result, while AJAHR can recognize which joint is amputated, the recovered mesh still terminates at the SMPL joint and can-not represent the true residual-limb length, shape, or sur-face continuity. These limitations constrain AJAHR’s appli-cability to downstream tasks that require explicit residual-limb geometry, such as prosthetic alignment, stump-volume estimation, residuum–socket interaction analysis, or biome-(a) Input Image  (c) AJAHR 

(d) ResiHMR (ours) (d1) Front View (d2) Back View 

(b) True Anatomy Figure 6. A visual comparison of AJAHR and ResiHMR (ours). (a,c) are copied from the AJAHR paper [8], where limb loss is represented by collapsing SMPL vertices toward the parent joint, resulting in joint-level truncation. (b) shows expert-verified evidence and an additional real image of the same individual revealing a clear below-knee residual limb, indicating that joint-level collapse fails to match the true anatomy. (d) shows ResiHMR reconstructions, including a normalized T-pose, with the residual limb highlighted in red (d1,d2). ResiHMR explicitly estimates the anatomical stump surface rather than collapsing geometry, producing a more realistic and clinically interpretable limb termination. 

chanical evaluation, where continuous stump surfaces and accurate termination points are required. 

9.1. Qualitative Comparison 

Up to the date of submission, the official AJAHR imple-mentation had not been released, which prevents us from performing a controlled quantitative comparison. For this reason, AJAHR is not included in our experimental eval-uation. Instead, we provide a qualitative examination by running ResiHMR on the same input image used in the AJAHR paper and comparing the outputs. As shown in Figure 6, the AJAHR results reproduced from the original paper exhibit a joint-level collapse pattern: the predicted mesh contains no residual limb below the left knee, and the left knee itself is collapsed to the proximal joint. To ver-ify the true anatomy of the target individual, we consulted a disability and human-movement expert and also located publicly available images of the same person performing a different action. These independent sources clearly con-firm that the subject does have a residual limb below the left knee. Therefore, we include panel (b) in Figure 6 to illus-trate the correct anatomy, which AJAHR fails to represent. In contrast, ResiHMR reconstructs an anatomically coher-ent below-knee residual limb, producing a realistic, water-27.43%              

> 3.54%
> 5.31%
> 34.51%
> 6.19%
> 8.85%
> 24.78%
> 21.24% Left residual
> limb below
> knee
> Right residual
> limb below
> elbow
> Right residual
> limb above
> elbow
> Right residual
> limb below
> knee
> Right residual
> limb above
> knee
> Left residual
> limb above
> knee
> Left residual
> limb below
> knee
> Left residual
> limb above
> elbow
> Male
> Female
> White
> Black
> Asian
> Latino
> (a) Distribution of the impairments
> (b) Gender distribution
> (c) Ethnic distribution Figure 7. Key Statistics of our LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset. (a) Distribution of residual-limb types, covering upper- and lower-limb amputations across both sides of the body. (b) Gender distribution. (c) Ethnic composition of the participants. Together, these statistics demonstrate the dataset’s demographic and impairment diversity, providing a representative foundation for benchmarking residual-limb–aware 2D/3D human pose and mesh reconstruction. .

tight stump surface as shown in Figure 6(d), with the recon-structed residual limb highlighted in red in (d1) and (d2). This side-by-side comparison underscores the fundamental difference between AJAHR’s joint-level truncation and our explicit residual-limb estimation, demonstrating the neces-sity of anatomically grounded modeling for amputee sub-jects. 

9.2. Conceptual Differences 

ResiHMR is designed from a fundamentally different per-spective and addresses limitations that AJAHR does not re-solve. 

Joint-level vs. residual-limb level modeling. AJAHR is 

amputated-joint aware : it predicts whether specific SMPL joints (and their descendants) are amputated and zeroes their rotations, leaving the limb to terminate at the nearest intact SMPL joint. [8] ResiHMR is residual-limb aware : it explicitly models residual-limb endpoints in 2D (via LD-Pose [52] keypoints) and lifts them into 3D as continuous points along the kinematic chain, rather than snapping them to the nearest SMPL joint. This allows residual limbs to end between canonical joints (e.g., mid-thigh, mid-shank), which is typical for real-world amputations. 

Topology collapse vs. explicit stump geometry. In AJAHR, the SMPL topology is never altered: the skele-ton and mesh connectivity remain intact, and amputations are simulated by collapsing vertices toward the parent joint. This produces a visually amputated region but not a re-solved stump surface anatomically. ResiHMR, by contrast, performs a geometry-based limb termination : it removes distal vertices, identifies a local boundary ring near the op-timized residual endpoint, and reconstructs a smooth, con-vex, watertight stump surface. As a result, the residual limb becomes an actual geometric structure in the mesh, rather than an implicit collapse of vertices. 

Learning regression vs. optimization objective. AJAHR is a learned, token-based regression model, which uses a VQ-VAE tokenizer and a transformer-based HMR ar-chitecture trained end-to-end on large-scale synthetic and real data. [8] Its amputation representation is baked into the SMPL pose parameters and the BPAC-Net classifier. ResiHMR is an optimization-based framework built on SMPLify-X, augmented with a Residual Anchor–Factor Optimization (RAFO) stage. RAFO explicitly optimizes the 3D anchor joint locations and continuous residual-length factors under residual 2D keypoint supervision and an-thropometric length priors, enabling anatomically meaning-ful residual-limb endpoints even without 3D stump ground truth. 

Supervision signals. AJAHR relies on synthetic amputee 3D annotations generated from the SMPL joint-zeroing pipeline; its supervision is therefore aligned with the intact SMPL kinematic tree and joint positions. [8] ResiHMR in-stead leverages residual-limb endpoints detector developed from LDPose, then uses RAFO plus geometry-based recon-struction to infer stump geometry consistent with these 2D cues and anthropometric segment ratios. This makes Re-siHMR more suitable for scenarios where accurate residual-limb localization matters (e.g., residual-length estimation, socket-region analysis), even if only 2D annotations are available. 

9.3. Why Joint-Level Truncation Is Insufficient for Downstream Biomechanics 

Because AJAHR represents amputations through joint-level collapse, implemented by drawing distal vertices toward the parent SMPL joint, the resulting mesh lacks an explicit stump surface and does not provide a measurable residual-limb length along the limb axis. This joint-based truncation preserves the intact SMPL kinematic structure but removes the anatomical information required to characterize the ge-ometry of the residual limb. As discussed in Section 8, explicit modeling of the resid-ual limb is essential from the standpoint of parasport sci-ence, clinical biomechanics, and disability-movement anal-ysis. The residual limb constitutes a load-bearing and dy-namically active segment that contributes to balance con-trol, inter-segment coordination, joint kinetics, compen-satory strategies, and prosthetic socket alignment. Without a geometric representation of the residual limb, including its termination point, surface continuity, and cross-sectional shape, these biomechanical factors cannot be meaning-fully assessed. Consequently, the joint-level representation adopted by AJAHR is unsuitable for downstream applica-tions that rely on physical stump geometry, such as residual-limb volume estimation, residuum–socket interaction mod-eling, and load-transfer analysis. In contrast, ResiHMR explicitly estimates residual-limb endpoints and continuous residual-length factors, and re-constructs a watertight stump surface tailored to the indi-vidual. This yields anatomically interpretable quantities, including segment length, local cross-sections along the stump, and overall stump geometry, enabling analyses rel-evant to prosthetic design, rehabilitation, classification re-search, and broader inclusive biomechanics. 

# 10. ResiHMR with other HMR Methods 

ResiHMR is designed as a backbone-agnostic extension that can be integrated with existing HMR pipelines. As illustrated in Figure 10, we first obtain an initial SMPL-X estimate (camera, pose, and shape) from an off-the-shelf HMR method, which can be either optimization-based (e.g., SMPLify-X) or regression-based (e.g., HSMR). This initial-ization provides a coarse full-body reconstruction under the intact-limb assumption. Given the input image and corresponding 2D keypoints (including residual-limb endpoints), we then apply our (a ） Input Image  (b）ResiHMR Mesh on Image     

> Figure 8. Limitation: Residual-limb surface shape approxima-tion. Although ResiHMR accurately localizes the residual-limb endpoint, the reconstructed stump surface adopts a smooth, con-vex prior that does not fully reflect the subject’s true residual-limb contour (yellow). The intact limb is reconstructed faith-fully (green), indicating that the discrepancy arises from lim-ited instance-specific stump shape cues rather than errors in body alignment. This limitation reflects the absence of residual-limb 3D training data and highlights a natural growth direction toward modeling individualized residual-limb geometry.

Residual Anchor-Factor Optimization to adapt the kine-matic structure by refining anchor joints and residual-limb proportions. This step corrects the mismatch between intact-limb priors and amputated anatomy. Subsequently, Residual Limb Reconstruction replaces the invalid distal ge-ometry with a smooth, watertight stump surface. This modular design enables ResiHMR to operate as a plug-in on top of existing HMR systems, extending them from intact-body reconstruction to anatomically coherent modeling of individuals with limb loss. For more details, please visit our project page: 

# 11. LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset Statistics 

The LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset is designed ex-clusively for evaluation. It is not used for training, pre-training, optimization, hyper-parameter tuning, or any other component of ResiHMR. This ensures strict separation be-tween training data and evaluation data, eliminating the pos-sibility of implicit supervision or data leakage. All quanti-tative and qualitative results reported in the main paper are therefore unbiased by this dataset. We apply rigorous selection criteria to ensure the dataset provides a reliable and fair basis for evaluating amputee mesh reconstruction. We include only images in which the majority of the subject’s body is visible, and where residual-(a) Input Image  (b) Mesh on  Image  (c)  Front View  (d) Left  Side View  (e) Right  Side View Figure 9. Limitation: Depth ambiguity from monocular input. Although the mesh aligns well with the input image in the front view (a–c), the side views (d–e) reveal depth ambiguities inherent to single-image reconstruction. Specifically, the arms are positioned in front of the torso rather than resting on the hips, and the upper body exhibits forward flexion that is not visible from the frontal perspective. These discrepancies arise from the absence of 3D residual-limb ground truth and the reliance on 2D annotations and healthy-body priors. Future 3D datasets with explicit residual-limb geometry may help resolve such ambiguities. 

limb regions are either clearly observable or can be unam-biguously inferred. Images with heavy occlusion, severe cropping, or ambiguous limb-termination cues are removed. For partially occluded subjects, missing body regions are estimated from nearby visible context to maintain anatom-ical completeness. We also minimize unrelated visual dis-tractors such as cluttered backgrounds, large prosthetic oc-clusions, or external objects that may interfere with pose es-timation. These curation steps ensure that evaluation accu-racy reflects the algorithm’s performance rather than noise from missing anatomy or extreme occlusion. The final dataset contains 255 curated images that span a broad variety of residual-limb configurations, amputation levels, residual-limb lengths, activities, genders, and eth-nic backgrounds. Each image is annotated with 17 stan-dard 2D body keypoints and 8 additional residual-limb end-points. To further facilitate optimization-based mesh fitting, we provide a per-person segmentation mask that isolates the human body region and reduces the influence of cloth-ing, hair, prosthetic devices, equipment, and background objects. These annotations create a clean and controlled setting for evaluating residual-limb aware pose and mesh reconstruction models. All annotations follow the LDPose protocol with exten-sions specific to limb-loss anatomy. Annotators were given detailed guidelines on identifying residual-limb endpoints, stump boundaries, and termination cues. Cases with un-certain or ambiguous stump locations were independently reviewed by multiple annotators and resolved through con-sensus. When multiple images of the same subject were available, cross-image consistency checks were performed to ensure stable residual-limb endpoint placement. This multi-stage quality control procedure ensures that the evalu-ation labels are precise, consistent, and anatomically mean-ingful. The dataset includes demographic and impairment-level diversity, which reduces bias and improves generalizability. Finally, precise residual-limb annotations and segmentation masks ensure that reconstructed meshes can be evaluated with respect to anatomically accurate ground-truth cues. Figure 7 presents the full statistics of the LDPose-LimbLoss Evaluation Dataset. The dataset includes 255 images distributed across a wide range of amputation types, genders, and ethnic backgrounds: 

Residual-limb types (Figure 7 (a)). The dataset spans upper- and lower-limb amputations, covering above- and below-elbow and above- and below-knee cases on both sides of the body. This diversity supports evaluation across a broad set of real-world amputation configurations. 

Gender distribution (Figure 7 (b)). Both male and fe-male subjects are included, enabling analyses that account for gender-related anthropometric variation. 

Ethnic composition (Figure 7 (c)). Participants represent multiple ethnic backgrounds, providing variation in body shape, skin tone, and appearance critical for inclusive pose and mesh reconstruction. Together, these statistics highlight the demographic and 

impairment-level diversity of the dataset, establishing a rep-resentative benchmark for residual-limb aware 2D/3D hu-man pose and mesh reconstruction. 

# 12. Discussion 

Although ResiHMR advances anatomically grounded 3D modeling for individuals with limb loss, several limitations remain that reflect the current state of available data and the inherent ambiguity of single-image reconstruction rather than deficiencies of the method. Output       

> Residual A nchor -Factor
> Optimization
> Residual Limb
> Reconstruction
> Back View Side View Bottom View 2D keypoints
> Input Image
> Existing HMR
> methods
> (including
> HSMR)
> Camera π
> Shape β
> Pose q Figure 10. Overview of our ResiHMR Framework with other existing HMR methods to initialize the SMPL-X/SMPL , in this case, we have HSMR as the exmaple for the regression-based HMR method.

First, while ResiHMR can reliably estimate continuous residual-limb endpoints for the majority of typical amputa-tion cases, particularly when the residual and intact limbs share broadly similar geometric structure, it cannot yet cap-ture complex limb deformities or highly irregular residual-limb shapes. As illustrated in Figure 8, the reconstructed mesh aligns well with the intact limb but does not fully reproduce the subject’s true residual-limb contour. This limitation arises because the model currently infers stump geometry from smooth convex priors rather than detailed, instance-specific surface cues. We view this not as a short-coming of the framework, but as a natural growth direc-tion: future work incorporating richer shape priors or multi-view information may enable individualized residual-limb surface modeling. Second, because there is currently no 3D dataset contain-ing ground-truth residual-limb geometry, ResiHMR relies on 2D annotations and anthropometric priors derived from healthy-body datasets. The lack of 3D supervision intro-duces depth ambiguity that is inherent to single-image re-construction. As shown in Figure 9, the mesh appears well aligned in the front view, yet the side view reveals discrep-ancies: the arm is positioned in front of the torso rather than resting on the hip, and the upper body exhibits forward flex-ion not visible in the frontal image. Such ambiguities reflect limitations of monocular input rather than the optimization framework. The emergence of future 3D datasets contain-ing residual-limb ground truth would likely mitigate these depth-related deviations and enable more accurate model-ing of amputee-specific body postures. These limitations point to several promising future di-rections, such as integrating multi-view information, incor-porating uncertainty-aware optimization, or learning limb-loss–specific 3D priors, while not detracting from the core contribution of ResiHMR, enabling explicit and anatomi-cally grounded modeling for individuals with limb loss. 

# 13. Qualitative Comparison 

In this section, we qualitatively compare ResiHMR with state-of-the-art HMR methods on individuals with limb loss from single-image inputs. Representative examples are shown in Figure 11, highlighting the advantages of our ap-proach. 

# 14. ResiHMR Demonstration 

In this section, we present additional qualitative results of ResiHMR to further illustrate its behavior across diverse limb-loss configurations, activities, and viewing conditions. Representative examples are shown in Figure 12 and Fig-ure 13, demonstrating the robustness of our residual-limb modeling pipeline and the anatomical coherence of the re-constructed meshes. Input Image  CameraHMR  HSMR  PromptHMR  TokenHMR  ResiHMR (Ours) Figure 11. Qualitative Comparison of ResiHMR with SOTA HMR methods. Please see this in GIF format in project page  ResiHMR. Input Image  Mesh  Front View  Back View  Side View  T-Pose View Figure 12. More Qualitative Evaluation of ResiHMR. For each input example, we show: (a) the input image, (b) the overlay of SMPL-X in the input view, (c) front view, (d) back view, (e) side view, (f) T-Pose view with model output Θ = {β, ψ, R, t, λ r } and 

mr = { mk | vk = ( xk , y k , z k , m k ) ∈ Vr }, and (c) (d) (e) and (f) all have residual limb being highlighted in red. Input Image  Mesh  Front View  Back View  Side View  T-Pose View Figure 13. More Qualitative Evaluation of ResiHMR. For each input example, we show: (a) the input image, (b) the overlay of SMPL-X in the input view, (c) front view, (d) back view, (e) side view, (f) T-Pose view with model output Θ = {β, ψ, R, t, λ r } and 

mr = { mk | vk = ( xk , y k , z k , m k ) ∈ Vr }, and (c) (d) (e) and (f) all have residual limb being highlighted in red.