Title: Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24144v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:33:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 

Min Hyeok Bang ∗1, Jun Hyeong Kim ∗1, Seung-Wook Kim †2 , and Se-Ho Lee †1 

> 1

Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence/Center for Advanced Image Information Technology, Jeonbuk National University, Jeonju-si, South Korea  

> 2

Division of Electronic and Communication Engineering, Pukyong National University, Busan, South Korea 

{bunsss77,kjun627}@jbnu.ac.kr, swkim@pknu.ac.kr, seholee@jbnu.ac.kr 

Abstract. In this paper, we present a novel geometry-aware style trans-fer framework for 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) that simultaneously transfers appearance attributes and geometric structures. Unlike prior works that primarily focus on color-based stylization and often over-look structural adaptation, our method explicitly incorporates geometry adaptation through a decoupled optimization scheme that alternately updates color and geometry parameters. This strategy alleviates poten-tial interference between color and geometry updates, leading to stable and consistent scene-level geometry transformation. The decoupled opti-mization is enabled by the proposed geometry-aware contrastive feature matching (GCFM). GCFM integrates RGB, depth, and edge cues into a contrastive objective and is employed in both optimization phases to effectively transfer structural characteristics from style images to Gaus-sian primitives. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves superior performance in both qualitative fidelity and quantitative met-rics, significantly outperforming existing 3DGS-based stylization meth-ods. Our code is available at https://github.com/oweixx/gast. 

Keywords: 3D Gaussian Splatting · Decoupled Optimization · Geometry-Aware Stylization 

# 1 Introduction 

Neural style transfer [5] sparked extensive research on transferring the artistic characteristics of a style image onto a content image by manipulating color, texture, and high-level feature statistics. Several works have improved visual quality and user controllability of style transfer using CNNs [13, 32], GANs [11, 19, 40], and diffusion models [33]. While these approaches achieve impressive  

> *

These authors contributed equally.  

> †

Corresponding authors.   

> arXiv:2606.24144v1 [cs.CV] 23 Jun 2026 2M. H. Bang et al.
> Fig. 1: Examples of geometry-aware style transfer in 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS). Given an input scene and various style guides, our method stylizes both color and geometry while preserving overall scene structure. Highlighted depth regions show how geometric details adaptively reflect structural cues from the target style.

results on single-view images, they are inherently limited to 2D representations and cannot maintain consistent stylization across different viewpoints. With the advent of neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [24], some researchers began exploring 3D style transfer to render stylized scenes with a consistent appearance across different viewpoints. NeRF-based methods [12, 14, 20, 25, 35, 37, 39] successfully introduced geometric and structural awareness into style transfer, but they suffer from heavy optimization costs and slow rendering, which limit their practical use in interactive applications. As a powerful alternative for real-time novel view synthesis, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [15] has been recently proposed. By modeling a scene as a set of anisotropic 3D Gaussians with learnable positions, scales, colors, and opacities, 3DGS achieves both high-quality rendering and remarkable efficiency compared to NeRFs. Its explicit and compact nature has made it attractive for applications beyond photorealistic reconstruction, such as interactive graphics and immersive content creation, leading to active exploration of 3D style transfer [4, 8, 18, 21, 22, 36]. However, applying style transfer to 3DGS often introduces a significant chal-lenge: the rendered output is far more sensitive to changes in geometry than to changes in color. While color modifications mainly affect the surface appearance, direct manipulation of geometric parameters alters the underlying structure of a scene, which means that even minor miscalculations in geometry can dras-tically degrade visual quality. This difficulty explains why most existing style transfer methods tend to adopt a conservative approach. They impose strong constraints on geometry and focus on adapting color-related attributes for styl-Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 3

ization, thereby limiting the full expressive potential of 3D style transfer. Es-sentially, such a conservative approach is analogous to applying wood-patterned wallpaper onto a piece of furniture: while the paper conforms to the furniture’s overall shape and surface details, it cannot modify the underlying structure to embody the new style. As a result, the outcome would be a superficial styl-ization that lacks the authentic geometric character of real wood—its grooves, indentations, and structural irregularities. In contrast, our work treats both ge-ometry and appearance as active components in the stylization process. We move beyond merely painting a surface and instead sculpt the stylistic features by actively shaping both the form and texture. To this end, we propose a novel geometry-aware style transfer framework for 3DGS that transfers both stylistic attributes and geometric structures, as illus-trated in Fig. 1. Given a 3DGS representation reconstructed from an input scene, our method applies the target style through a decoupled optimization process that alternately refines geometry and color parameters. The decoupled geometry and color optimization is driven by the proposed geometry-aware contrastive fea-ture matching (GCFM). To ensure a holistic alignment, GCFM leverages joint representations from color, depth, and edge modalities. A contrastive objective then guides the optimization by pulling each rendered feature toward its most similar counterpart in the style image while pushing it away from the most dis-similar one. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our main contributions are summarized as follows. 

• We propose a simple yet effective geometry-aware style transfer framework for 3DGS, built upon a decoupled optimization scheme that alternates be-tween color and geometry updates for stable and consistent stylization. 

• We introduce GCFM, a geometry-aware contrastive feature matching scheme that aligns the scene’s geometry with the style’s distinctive structures by op-timizing a contrastive loss across multi-modal representations incorporating color, depth, and edge cues. 

• Experimental results demonstrate that our method produces visually faithful stylization and consistently outperforms existing approaches in both quali-tative and quantitative evaluations. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Neural Style Transfer 

Gatys et al . [5] pioneered neural style transfer by using Gram matrices of CNN feature activations to encode image style, capturing correlations between feature channels while discarding spatial information. Following this work, research ex-panded rapidly in several directions: feed-forward networks for real-time style transfer [13,32], adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) [10] for arbitrary style transfer, and GAN-based approaches for unpaired domain-to-domain transla-tion [11, 19, 40]. Recently, diffusion models enable text-driven and highly con-trollable style transfer with unprecedented fidelity [33]. Despite these advances, 4 M. H. Bang et al. 

image-based methods remain inherently limited to single-view domains, making them unsuitable for 3D scenarios where strict multi-view consistency is essential. 

2.2 3D Style Transfer 

3D style transfer aims to achieve consistent stylization across novel views. Early studies explored explicit scene representations such as point clouds [9] and meshes [7]. With the emergence of NeRFs [24], subsequent approaches embedded style in-formation into volumetric representations to achieve multi-view consistency [12, 14, 20, 35, 37]. However, the high-dimensional implicit nature and the slow ren-dering speed of NeRF posed challenges for real-time applications and direct geometric manipulation. The advent of 3DGS offers a compelling alternative with real-time rendering capabilities and explicit geometric primitives. In [21], zero-shot style transfer was introduced, where VGG features are embedded into Gaussian primitives to maintain view coherence. Based on [21], Kovács et al . [18] pruned and split Gaus-sians and incorporated multi-scale style losses for enhanced style fidelity. In [36], user-controllable parameters for stylization (scale, region, and color) and losses to avoid artifacts were introduced. Liu et al . [22] improved global style consis-tency by aligning scene content with style features using segmentation masks and regularization. Galerne et al . [4] optimized only the constant color compo-nent of each Gaussian to match multi-scale style statistics. Recently, Howil et al . [8] used CLIP guidance to enable both image- and text-guided style transfer across images, videos, 3D objects, and even 4D dynamic scenes within a unified Gaussian splatting framework. Despite recent progress, most 3DGS-based style transfer methods remain lim-ited to appearance adaptation. Modifying geometry is highly unstable and can easily distort the underlying scene structure, so most methods adopt a conserva-tive design that preserves geometry. For example, [21] and [4] update only color attributes while keeping geometry fixed; [18] introduces limited geometric adap-tation through Gaussian splitting during pre-processing and fine-tuning stages; and [36] and [22] employ depth preservation losses to maintain geometric fidelity rather than to actively incorporate geometry as a stylistic element. [8] enables joint optimization of color and geometry, but it still places primary emphasis on appearance adaptation, leaving geometry-oriented stylization relatively under-explored. While these strategies yield stable results, they fall short of treating geometry as a medium of style. In this work, we address this gap by exploring geometric stylization as a means to achieve more expressive and structurally consistent 3D style transfer. 

# 3 Proposed Method 

The goal of this paper is to transfer the artistic style from a 2D style image 

IS to a 3D scene constructed from a set of content images IC = {IC 

> i

}Mi=1 with spatial and geometric coherence. Fig. 2 illustrates the overall framework of the proposed style transfer method leveraging 3DGS [15]. As a preliminary step, a Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 5

Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed geometry-aware style transfer framework for 3DGS. The pipeline consists of (a) 3DGS representation, (b) color matching, and (c) decoupled optimization between color and geometry optimization phases guided by multi-modal (color, depth, edge) features from (d) the style reference via the proposed GCFM. 

Fig. 3: Comparison between joint-step (top) and decoupled (bottom) optimization. The joint-step optimization updates color and geometry simultaneously, while our de-coupled optimization alternates them (both run for the same total iterations). 

3DGS representation Ginit = {Gn := ( θn, μ n, Σn, α n)}Nn=1 is reconstructed from 

IC , where each Gaussian primitive Gn is defined by the color representation θn,its 3D center position μn ∈ R3, its 3D covariance matrix Σn ∈ R3×3, and its opacity αn ∈ [0 , 1] . We initialize the 3D style transfer by color matching [37], obtaining Gc. This process aligns the color statistics of the content images in 

IC with those of the style image IS using a linear transformation, ensuring the Gaussian primitives start with a color distribution closer to the target style. Then, we transfer the target style using a decoupled optimization scheme, which alternatively refines the color and geometric parameters. This alternating process is key to stabilizing the transfer process in 3DGS. Both optimization phases are driven by the proposed GCFM, which effectively guides both the color and geometry refinement. In the following sections, we describe our method in detail. 6 M. H. Bang et al. 

3.1 Decoupled Optimization for 3D Style Transfer 

Most existing 3DGS-based style transfer methods [4,18,21,22,36] concentrate on transferring appearance attributes, whereas geometric stylization has remained a challenging problem. Let the Gaussian representation G decomposed into color parameters Θ = {θn}Nn=1 and geometry parameters Φ = {ϕn}Nn=1 . Our ultimate goal is to jointly optimize the color parameters Θ and the geometry parameters 

Φ to minimize a global style transfer loss L(Θ, Φ). For the color parameters, we optimize only the zeroth-order (DC) component of the spherical harmonics color representation, which corresponds to the base RGB color, while keeping the higher-order coefficients fixed, following [4]. The geometry parameters are defined as ϕn = {μn, Σn, α n} for position, covariance, and opacity. However, a naive simultaneous optimization of both parameter sets often results in interference between the color and geometry updates. This leads to color over-stylization, in which the optimization process sacrifices the essential structure of the scene due to a misguided attempt to embed low-level stylistic patterns directly into the geometry. As illustrated in the first row of Fig. 3, the flower’s structure is progressively corrupted as iterations proceed, with exagger-ated color patterns ignoring the underlying geometry and ultimately causing a complete loss of perceptual fidelity. To overcome these issues and enable stable geometry-aware style transfer, we introduce a decoupled optimization scheme . The entire optimization proceeds for K outer cycles. Within each cycle k, we break the global problem into two alternating subproblems as follows: 

Θk+1 = arg min  

> Θ

L(Θ, Φk), (1) 

Φk+1 = arg min  

> Φ

L(Θk+1 , Φ). (2) In this two-phase process, we first update the color parameters Θ using the geometry fixed from the previous cycle, Φk. Subsequently, we perform geometric stylization by updating the geometry parameters Φ using the newly refined colors, Θk+1 . In practice, we approximate the solutions to these subproblems in Eqs. (1) and (2) by performing a fixed number of inner gradient descent steps for each phase. Each outer cycle consists of two sequential phases: 

Color optimization phase. To solve for Θk+1 , we fix the geometry parameters 

Φk and update the color parameters for Nc inner steps. For i = 0 , . . . , N c − 1,the color parameters are updated as 

Θk,i +1 = Θk,i − η∇ΘL(Θk,i , Φk), (3) where η is the learning rate. The final color parameters after Nc steps, denoted as Θk+1 = Θk,N c , are then used in the following phase. 

Geometry optimization phase. Subsequently, to solve for Φk+1 , we hold the newly updated color parameters Θk+1 fixed and refine the geometry parameters Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 7 

> Fig. 4: Conceptual illustration of the GCFM process.

for Ng inner steps. For j = 0 , . . . , N g − 1, the geometry parameters are updated as 

Φk,j +1 = Φk,j − η∇ΦL(Θk+1 , Φk,j ). (4) The resulting geometry parameters, Φk+1 = Φk,N g are then carried forward to the next outer cycle, completing one full round of optimization. By alternating color and geometry updates in this way, the scheme mitigates optimization conflicts between the two optimization processes and establishes a mutual guidance loop: color updates provide a stable reference for geometry refinement, and refined geometry supports consistent color adaptation. As a result, the optimization converges more stably and achieves reliable geometry-aware style transfer in 3DGS, as illustrated in the second row of Fig. 3. 

3.2 Geometry-Aware Contrastive Feature Matching (GCFM) 

Feature matching-based style transfer [37] has been widely adopted in many 3D style transfer approaches [14, 22, 35]. In this work, we utilize a multi-modal representation for feature matching, incorporating color, depth, and edge cues to enhance geometry awareness. Depth maps can provide coarse spatial infor-mation, but often suffer from noise and missing details. Edge maps, on the other hand, highlight distinct structural boundaries and facilitate the alignment of shapes at the boundary level between content and style images. By jointly leveraging color, depth, and edge modalities, the proposed GCFM offers com-plementary guidance that enforces consistent 3D style transfer and alleviates the limitations of each individual cue. Specifically, the depth map of the rendered image is obtained directly from the 3DGS rendering process, while the depth map of the style image is estimated using [34]. Since complex textures and fine patterns, which are common in style images, tend to produce noisy edges in the color domain, we extract more structurally reliable edges from the depth map of the style image. The final edge maps are thus generated using the standard Canny detector [2] from two different sources: the rendered image and the depth map of the style image. Fig. 4 presents an overview of the GCFM process. For a given source image 

Is, where s ∈ {R , S} denotes the rendered and style images, respectively, we use 8 M. H. Bang et al. 

a pretrained VGG network [29] to extract deep features from the three modal-ities: color ( Fs

> color

), depth ( Fs

> depth

), and edge ( Fs

> edge

). Matching these features independently, however, can lead to inconsistencies, where appearance, shape, and edge patterns fail to align coherently. Therefore, to ensure holistic alignment, we employ a joint feature matching strategy by concatenating the features from all three modalities. For a given source s, a joint feature map is defined as 

Fs = Fs

> color

, Fs

> depth

, Fs

> edge

, where [·, ·, ·] indicates channel-wise concatenation. With the joint feature maps defined, it is required to align the structural fea-tures between the rendered and style images. Existing methods define positive pairs, i.e ., structurally similar features that are pulled closer in the embedding space [14, 37]. However, we argue that for effective 3D style transfer, it is in-sufficient to only reflect such similarities. To capture more discriminative style representations, the learning process should also explicitly contrast the rendered features against dissimilar features from the style source. Therefore, we addi-tionally define negative pairs, representing dissimilar features that should be pushed apart, enabling the learning process to capture more discriminative style representations. We identify these pairs for each spatial location x = ( u, v ) in the rendered feature map FR. The positive sample is its nearest neighbor in the style feature map FS while the negative sample is the farthest one. We find the spatial location of these samples, y+(x) and y−(x), by respectively minimizing and maximizing a feature distance as follows: 

y+(x) = arg min 

> y

Dcos 

 FR(x), FS (y), (5) 

y−(x) = arg max 

> y

Dcos 

 FR(x), FS (y), (6) where Dcos (·, ·) = 1 − cos( ·, ·) represents the cosine distance. Based on the matched positive and negative indices, we formulate a single contrastive objec-tive, called GCFM loss. The core principle is to treat each feature FR(x) from the rendered image as an anchor, pulling it toward its positive style counter-part FS (y+(x)) while pushing it away from its negative counterpart FS (y−(x)) 

during optimization. The final GCFM loss is thus defined as follows: 

LGC = 1

|ΩF|

X

> x∈ΩF



2 + Dcos 

 FR(x), FS (y+(x)) 

− Dcos 

 FR(x), FS (y−(x))  

, (7) where ΩF is a set of all spatial locations of the feature map. 

3.3 Loss Function 

In this section, we present the loss function L(Θ, Φ) used for the proposed method to optimize the color parameters Θ and the geometry parameters Φ.For the sake of brevity, we simply denote the loss function as L, which is given by 

L = λGC LGC + λcont Lcont + λTV LTV + δreg Lreg , (8) Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 9

where λGC , λcont , and λTV are empirically chosen hyper-parameters that control the relative contribution of each loss term. Here, δreg = 1 during the geometry optimization phase, and δreg = 0 during the color optimization phase. Lcont ,

LTV , and Lreg denote the content preservation loss, total variation (TV) loss, and geometry regularization loss, respectively. Each term is detailed as follows: 

Content preservation loss. To ensure that the resulting stylized image pre-serves the structural fidelity of the original content, we adopt a perceptual loss based on VGG feature embeddings [29]. To this end, we minimize the distance between the VGG features of the rendered image IR and those of the content image IC as follows: 

Lcont = ∥ψ(IR) − ψ(IC )∥22, (9) where ψ(·) denotes the feature representation extracted from a pre-trained VGG-16 network. The content preservation loss maintains the original structure of the underlying scene while allowing visual adaptation to the style image. 

TV loss. To further improve the visual quality of the stylized results, we impose a TV regularization that encourages local spatial smoothness in the rendered image. Minimizing the TV loss effectively suppresses high-frequency noise and reduces artifacts along object boundaries. The TV loss is given by 

LTV = 1

|ΩI|

X

> x∈ΩI

∥IR(x) − IR(x + eh)∥2 + ∥IR(x) − IR(x + ev)∥2, (10) where ΩI is a set of all spatial locations of the rendered image, and eh = (0 , 1) and 

ev = (1 , 0) are the unit offset vectors for the horizontal and vertical neighbors, respectively. 

Geometry regularization loss. Unconstrained geometry optimization may cause Gaussian primitives to degenerate into undesirable configurations, such as excessive expansion that produces global blurring or collapse into elongated shapes. To prevent such artifacts, we adopt a geometry regularization loss that penalizes deviations in opacity, scale, and rotation from their initial color-matched states, and additionally enforces depth consistency: 

Lreg = λα ∥α − αc∥2 + λs ∥s − sc∥2 + λr ∥r − rc∥2 + λd ∥DR − Dc∥, (11) where the weighting coefficients λα, λs, λr, and λd are chosen empirically. Here, 

α, s, and r denote the opacity, scale, and rotation parameters of all Gaussian primitives, respectively, where the superscript c indicates their values after color matching with Gc. DR denotes the rendered depth map from the current 3DGS model, and Dc represents the reference depth map obtained from Gc, respec-tively. Overall, this regularization anchors the stylization process to the original scene structure, enabling effective style-driven adaptations while preventing in-stability in geometry. 10 M. H. Bang et al.      

> Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison of the Flower and Horns scenes. The top row shows the input scenes, rendered depth maps, and the corresponding style image for each scene. The subsequent rows present stylized results produced by different methods, including G-Style [18], StylizedGS [36], SGSST [4], CLIPGaussian [8], and Ours.

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate our 3DGS-based style transfer method across a total of 72 scene–style combinations (8 scenes × 9 styles). 

Scenes. We use three representative multi-view scene datasets: LLFF [23] (4 forward-facing scenes), Tanks & Temples (T&T) [17] (2 complex indoor/outdoor 360 ° scenes), and MipNeRF-360 [1] (2 large-scale unbounded scenes). Together, these eight scenes provide a wide range of geometric structures and camera tra-jectories, from small bounded scenes to large-scale 360 ° environments, allowing robust evaluation of geometry-aware stylization. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 11 

Table 1: Quantitative comparison of style transfer quality (SIFID) and multi-view consistency. Bold and underline indicate the best and the second-best results. Methods SIFID ↓                                 

> Short-Range Consistency Long-Range Consistency LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓
> StyleGaussian [21] 3.3405 0.050 0.053 0.141 0.114 G-Style [18] 1.2955 0.045 0.035 0.118 0.085 StylizedGS [36] 2.2439 0.028 0.021 0.072 0.062
> SGSST [4] 1.3936 0.048 0.048 0.129 0.109 CLIPGaussian [8] 3.3685 0.048 0.046 0.128 0.108
> Ours 1.1736 0.042 0.034 0.114 0.084

Styles. We use a set of nine style exemplars gathered from multiple sources—four from [14], three from WikiArt [30], one from [8], and one curated from publicly available online art collections [3]. To ensure stylistic diversity and generaliza-tion, these exemplars are deliberately drawn from heterogeneous sources, cover-ing both classical and modern art movements as well as 3D-aware styles. The selection emphasizes spatially structured patterns to evaluate the model’s ability to capture geometric as well as appearance-based stylistic characteristics. 

4.2 Implementation Details 

Our implementation is built upon the public PyTorch [27] codebase of 3DGS [15]. We adopt the proposed decoupled optimization scheme for geometry-aware style transfer, where color and geometry parameters are alternately updated. Algo-rithm A in the supplementary material summarizes the overall optimization pro-cedure, illustrating how the color and geometry parameters are updated in an alternating manner under the proposed framework. Unless otherwise specified, the loss weights are set as λGC = 2 .0, λcont = 1 × 10 −3, λTV = 0 .02 , λα = 1 .0,

λs = 1 .0 λr = 1 .0, and λd = 10 .0. We perform the stylization process for K = 30 

outer cycles using the Adam optimizer [16], with Nc = 10 color updates and 

Ng = 90 geometry updates per cycle, totaling 3,000 iterations. We set the learn-ing rate η = 1 ×10 −4 for all experiments, except for the T&T dataset [17], where it is reduced to 2.5 × 10 −5 for stable convergence, following [18] which adopted a similar adjustment for scenes with higher geometric complexity. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 48 GB of memory. 

4.3 Comparison with State-of-the-Arts Qualitative comparison. Fig. 5 compares our method with state-of-the-art 3DGS-based style transfer approaches [4,8,18,36]. Unlike previous methods that primarily focus on color-based appearance transfer, our approach jointly adapts both appearance and geometric structure, producing visually richer and struc-turally coherent 3D stylization across all evaluated scenes. For instance, in the 

Flower scene on the left, our method successfully transforms the object’s shape to reflect the block-like structural patterns of the target style, rather than merely applying color changes. In the Horns scene on the right, our method transforms the original surfaces into particle-like structures while preserving fine geometric details and clear depth variations around the horn. This enhanced structural expressiveness leads to more immersive and visually compelling results overall. 12 M. H. Bang et al.  

> Fig. 6: Results of the user study comparing StyleGaussian [21], G-Style [18], SGSST [4], CLIPGaussian [8], and Ours.

Quantitative comparison. Table 1 summarizes the quantitative evaluation using the Single Image Fréchet Inception Distance (SIFID) [28], which measures the perceptual distance between each stylized image and its target style. Unlike FID [6], which requires large image sets, SIFID is suitable for evaluating single-scene stylization results. Each result is rendered from multiple viewpoints and averaged to ensure robustness. A lower SIFID indicates closer alignment with the target style distribution. As shown in the table, our method achieves the lowest SIFID score (1.1736), demonstrating superior style fidelity and perceptual alignment with the target style compared to previous methods. Also in Table 1, we further evaluate the multi-view consistency of different methods under both short- and long-range settings. Following [21], one view is warped to another using optical flow [31] with softmax splatting [26], and styl-ization consistency is measured by masked RMSE and LPIPS [38]. While Styl-izedGS [36] reports the best consistency scores, this may stem from its overly smooth and desaturated renderings, which inherently favor consistency met-rics rather than reflecting strong stylization effects. 3 Excluding StylizedGS, our method achieves the best overall performance, ranking first in both LPIPS and RMSE across short- and long-range consistency settings. These results indicate that our framework achieves a better balance between stylization quality and multi-view consistency compared to other 3DGS-based methods. 

4.4 User Study 

To assess the perceptual quality of the stylized renderings, we conducted an online user study involving 37 participants. Our method was compared against four representative 3DGS-based style transfer methods [4, 8, 18, 21]. We used four distinct 3D scenes and four style reference images, each containing spatially consistent texture and geometric cues—such as blocky patterns and particle-like elements—two of which are shown in Fig. 5. For each result, we asked partici-pants to rate their (1) style similarity to the reference style image, (2) overall visual appeal, and (3) content recognizability of the original scene. The analyzed outcomes of the user study are shown in Fig. 6. Participants consistently rated our approach as the best across all three evaluation criteria,  

> 3A detailed comparison with StylizedGS, including qualitative analysis, is provided in Section D of the supplementary material.

Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 13 

Table 2: Comparison of average stylization times across various 3DGS-based methods. Methods Stylization Time StyleGaussian [21] 410m 13s G-Style [18] 29m 05s StylizedGS [36] 3m 32s    

> SGSST [4] 58m 52s CLIPGaussian [8] 22m 46s Ours 14m 14s

Fig. 7: Ablation study on GCFM. The 1st and 3rd columns show the stylized rendered views, while the 2nd and 4th columns display the corresponding enlarged depth maps. 

demonstrating its effectiveness in producing high-quality stylizations that are faithful to the target style while preserving scene content. 

4.5 Complexity Analysis 

Table 2 compares the average stylization time of representative 3DGS-based methods. While StyleGaussian [21] requires several hours of optimization for a single style, our method completes the stylization in about fourteen min-utes, showing a substantial improvement in efficiency. Although StylizedGS [36] achieves the fastest runtime, it often compromises geometric consistency and style fidelity, as discussed in Section D of the supplementary material. Overall, our approach maintains a favorable trade-off between computational speed and visual quality, providing a practical and scalable solution for 3D scene stylization. Detailed per-scene analysis on stylization time and resource usage is provided in Section A of the supplementary material. 

4.6 Ablation Studies Ablation study on GCFM. Fig. 7 presents the ablation results of GCFM, showing how each component contributes to geometry-aware stylization. To cap-ture geometric cues beyond appearance, GCFM integrates both depth and edge modalities into the feature representation. Additionally, a contrastive objective is introduced to enforce stronger feature alignment, enhancing the distinctive-ness of geometry-related patterns. As shown in the figure, removing the con-trastive objective (w/o contrast) weakens feature alignment, leading to a loss of structural distinctiveness in the depth maps. Similarly, using a single-modal rep-resentation (single-modal) results in oversimplified geometric structures, which 14 M. H. Bang et al. 

Table 3: Ablation study on optimization strategies. Methods SIFID ↓                       

> Short-Range Consistency Long-Range Consistency LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓
> Only geometry 2.5496 0.045 0.040 0.113 0.096 Only color 1.5392 0.042 0.037 0.115 0.086 Joint-step 1.4220 0.042 0.036 0.122 0.087 Decoupled (Ours) 1.1736 0.042 0.034 0.114 0.084

indicates that multi-modal integration is essential for capturing fine geometric contours. Overall, the full GCFM yields sharper contours and faithfully repro-duces the underlying geometric structures, confirming that both the contrastive loss and multi-modal feature integration are essential for capturing and utilizing complex scene geometry effectively. 

Ablation study on optimization strategies. Table 3 compares different op-timization strategies for geometry-aware stylization. When updating only ge-ometry, the model primarily modifies structural parameters while keeping color parameters unchanged. This results in poor stylization fidelity and the highest SIFID due to insufficient adaptation to the target style, and also causes no-ticeable cross-view inconsistency from unstable geometric updates. In contrast, optimizing only color achieves lower SIFID by transferring color appearance more effectively, but it still fails to capture geometry-dependent style cues, leading to weak structural adaptation and reduced consistency across views. The joint-step approach, which updates color and geometry simultaneously, achieves moder-ate improvement in SIFID but suffers from color over-stylization and unstable convergence, ultimately leading to inferior performance. Finally, our decoupled optimization scheme achieves the best trade-off between stylization fidelity and geometric stability, showing the lowest SIFID and consistent improvements in both short- and long-range LPIPS and RMSE. These results show that separat-ing the color and geometry updates stabilizes optimization and enables harmo-nious integration of stylistic appearance and geometric adaptation. Additional results and analyses are provided in Sections B–E of the supple-mentary material, including user study details, ablation studies, and extended qualitative results that further validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. 

# 5 Conclusions 

In this work, we presented a geometry-aware style transfer framework for 3DGS that jointly stylizes both appearance and geometry, achieving stable optimiza-tion and consistent stylization results. To address the optimization instability caused by simultaneous updates of color and geometry, we introduced a de-coupled optimization scheme that alternates between the two, enabling mutual guidance between appearance and structure. During this process, we employed the proposed GCFM loss, which integrates RGB, depth, and edge cues into a unified contrastive objective to effectively capture geometric and structural char-acteristics of the target style. Extensive experiments across various 3D scenes demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance in both stylization quality and multi-view consistency compared to recent 3DGS-based methods. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 15 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea Government(MSIT)(RS-2026-25473686, RS-2026-25489106). 

# References 

1. Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In: CVPR. pp. 5470–5479 (2022) 2. Canny, J.: A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE TPAMI PAMI-8(6), 679–698 (1986) 3. Freepik: Seamless pattern with water waves and splashes. https://www.freepik. com / premium - vector / seamless - pattern - with - water - waves - splashes _ 9413868.htm 

4. Galerne, B., Wang, J., Raad, L., Morel, J.M.: SGSST: Scaling Gaussian splatting style transfer. In: CVPR. pp. 26535–26544 (June 2025) 5. Gatys, L.A., Ecker, A.S., Bethge, M.: Image style transfer using convolutional neural networks. In: CVPR. pp. 2414–2423 (2016) 6. Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., Hochreiter, S.: Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In: Guyon, I., Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (eds.) NeurIPS. vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc. (2017) 7. Höllein, L., Johnson, J., Nießner, M.: StyleMesh: Style transfer for indoor 3D scene reconstructions. In: CVPR. pp. 6198–6208 (2022) 8. Howil, K., Waczyńska, J., Borycki, P., Dziarmaga, T., Mazur, M., Spurek, P.: CLIP-Gaussian: Universal and multimodal style transfer based on Gaussian splatting. In: NeurIPS (2025) 9. Huang, H.P., Tseng, H.Y., Saini, S., Singh, M., Yang, M.H.: Learning to stylize novel views. In: ICCV. pp. 13869–13878 (October 2021) 10. Huang, X., Belongie, S.: Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In: ICCV. pp. 1501–1510 (2017) 11. Huang, X., Liu, M.Y., Belongie, S., Kautz, J.: Multimodal unsupervised image-to-image translation. In: ECCV. pp. 172–189 (2018) 12. Huang, Y.H., He, Y., Yuan, Y.J., Lai, Y.K., Gao, L.: StylizedNeRF: Consistent 3D scene stylization as stylized NeRF via 2D-3D mutual learning. In: CVPR. pp. 18342–18352 (June 2022) 13. Johnson, J., Alahi, A., Fei-Fei, L.: Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In: ECCV. pp. 694–711 (2016) 14. Jung, H., Nam, S., Sarafianos, N., Yoo, S., Sorkine-Hornung, A., Ranjan, R.: Ge-ometry transfer for stylizing radiance fields. In: CVPR. pp. 8565–8575 (June 2024) 15. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3D Gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 42 (4) (July 2023) 16. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In: Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2015) 17. Knapitsch, A., Park, J., Zhou, Q.Y., Koltun, V.: Tanks and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction. ACM TOG 36 (4), 1–13 (2017) 16 M. H. Bang et al. 18. Kovács, Á.S., Hermosilla, P., Raidou, R.G.: G-Style: Stylized Gaussian splatting. In: Computer Graphics Forum. vol. 43, p. e15259. Wiley Online Library (2024) 19. Lee, H.Y., Tseng, H.Y., Huang, J.B., Singh, M., Yang, M.H.: Diverse image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In: ECCV. pp. 35–51 (2018) 20. Liu, K., Zhan, F., Chen, Y., Zhang, J., Yu, Y., El Saddik, A., Lu, S., Xing, E.P.: StyleRF: Zero-shot 3D style transfer of neural radiance fields. In: CVPR. pp. 8338– 8348 (June 2023) 21. Liu, K., Zhan, F., Xu, M., Theobalt, C., Shao, L., Lu, S.: StyleGaussian: Instant 3D style transfer with Gaussian splatting. In: SIGGRAPH Asia (2024) 22. Liu, W., Liu, Z., Yang, X., Sha, M., Li, Y.: ABC-GS: Alignment-based controllable style transfer for 3D Gaussian splatting. In: ICME (2025) 23. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Ortiz-Cayon, R., Kalantari, N.K., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R., Kar, A.: Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with prescrip-tive sampling guidelines. ACM TOG 38 (4) (2019) 24. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: Vedaldi, A., Bischof, H., Brox, T., Frahm, J.M. (eds.) ECCV. pp. 405–421 (2020) 25. Nguyen-Phuoc, T., Liu, F., Xiao, L.: SNeRF: Stylized neural implicit representa-tions for 3D scenes. ACM Trans. Graph. 41 (4) (Jul 2022) 26. Niklaus, S., Liu, F.: Softmax splatting for video frame interpolation. In: CVPR. pp. 5437–5446 (June 2020) 27. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al.: PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In: NeurIPS (2019) 28. Shaham, T.R., Dekel, T., Michaeli, T.: SinGAN: Learning a generative model from a single natural image. In: ICCV. pp. 4570–4580 (October 2019) 29. Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In: ICLR (2015) 30. Tan, W.R., Chan, C.S., Aguirre, H., Tanaka, K.: Improved ArtGAN for conditional synthesis of natural image and artwork. IEEE TIP 28 (1), 394–409 (2019), https: //doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2018.2866698 

31. Teed, Z., Deng, J.: RAFT: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In: ECCV. p. 402–419 (2020) 32. Ulyanov, D., Vedaldi, A., Lempitsky, V.S.: Instance normalization: The missing ingredient for fast stylization. CoRR abs/1607.08022 (2016) 33. Wang, Z., Zhao, L., Xing, W.: StyleDiffusion: Controllable disentangled style trans-fer via diffusion models. In: ICCV. pp. 7677–7689 (October 2023) 34. Yang, L., Kang, B., Huang, Z., Zhao, Z., Xu, X., Feng, J., Zhao, H.: Depth anything V2. CoRR abs/2406.09414 (2024) 35. Zhang, D., Fernandez-Labrador, C., Schroers, C.: CoARF: Controllable 3D artistic style transfer for radiance fields. In: 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). pp. 612–622 (2024) 36. Zhang, D., Yuan, Y.J., Chen, Z., Zhang, F.L., He, Z., Shan, S., Gao, L.: StylizedGS: Controllable stylization for 3D Gaussian splatting. IEEE TPAMI pp. 1–13 (2025) 37. Zhang, K., Kolkin, N., Bi, S., Luan, F., Xu, Z., Shechtman, E., Snavely, N.: ARF: Artistic radiance fields. In: ECCV. pp. 717–733 (2022) 38. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., Shechtman, E., Wang, O.: The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In: CVPR. pp. 586–595 (2018) 39. Zhang, Y., He, Z., Xing, J., Yao, X., Jia, J.: Ref-NPR: Reference-based non-photorealistic radiance fields for controllable scene stylization. In: CVPR. pp. 4242– 4251 (June 2023) Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 17 40. Zhu, J.Y., Park, T., Isola, P., Efros, A.A.: Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In: ICCV. pp. 2242–2251 (2017) Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 1

# Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 

# – Supplementary Material – 

Algorithm A Geometry-aware style transfer in 3DGS 

1: Input: Content images IC = {IC 

> i

}Mi=1 , style image IS

2: Output: Stylized Gaussians Gs = {Θs, Φs}

3: Ginit ← Recon3DGS (Ic)

4: Gc = {Θ0, Φ0} ← ColorMatching (Ginit , IC , IS )

5: for k = 1 , 2, . . . , K do  ▷ outer cycle 6: Θ ← Θk−1

7: Φ ← Φk−1

8: // Color optimization phase 

9: for i = 1 , 2, . . . , N c do 

10: v ← RandomView() 

11: IR ← Render (v, {Θ, Φ}) ▷ to compute L

12: L ← λGC LGC + λTV LTV + λcont Lcont 

13: Θ ← Θ − η ∇ΘL ▷ Φ is not updated 14: end for 

15: Θk ← Θ

16: // Geometry optimization phase 

17: for j = 1 , 2, . . . , N g do 

18: v ← RandomView() 

19: IR ← Render (v, {Θ, Φ}) ▷ to compute L

20: L ← λGC LGC + λTV LTV + λcont Lcont + Lreg 

21: Φ ← Φ − η ∇ΦL ▷ Θ is not updated 22: end for 

23: Φk ← Φ

24: end for 

25: return GK = {ΘK , ΦK }

# A Additional Complexity Analysis 

Table A summarizes the number of Gaussian primitives, the average stylization time, and GPU memory usage across different scenes. The stylization process takes approximately 9–18 minutes per scene depending on scene complexity and rendering configurations. While the stylization time does not show a clear cor-relation with the number of Gaussians, it can vary depending on scene charac-teristics and rendering configurations. In contrast, GPU memory usage tends to increase with the number of Gaussian primitives. 

# B User Study Details 

Recruitment and procedure. We conducted an online user study with 37 participants to evaluate the perceptual quality of our method. The survey was 2 M. H. Bang et al. 

Table A: Computational efficiency analysis. Summary of the average number of Gaus-sians, stylization time, and GPU memory usage for each scene. Scenes # of Gaussians (M) Stylization Time GPU Memory (GB) trex 0.54 17m 54s 20.49 flower 0.54 17m 00s 16.63 horns 0.81 18m 54s 22.93 fern 0.82 18m 31s 15.41 garden 4.20 16m 23s 38.94 kitchen 1.53 7m 25s 20.06 train 1.07 8m 24s 25.69 truck 2.59 9m 16s 27.21 

hosted using an online survey platform, and participants were recruited through our university’s online community and bulletin boards. Each participant completed evaluation trials comprising four scenes and four style images, resulting in a total of 16 scene–style combinations. In each trial, participants compared the stylized results from our method against four meth-ods: StyleGaussian [21], G-Style [18], SGSST [4], and CLIPGaussian [8]. All results were presented anonymously and in a randomized order to mitigate po-tential bias. 

Survey interface. Fig. A illustrates the typical interface presented to partici-pants on the online survey platform. For each trial, participants were provided with the original scene, the target style image, and five anonymized stylized results. They were then asked to answer the following three questions. 

Survey questions. Participants were asked the following three questions for each set of results: 

Q1. Style Similarity (Ranking) “Please rank the following results according to their similarity to the reference style (1 =Most Similar, 5 =Least Similar).” 

Note: This was a ranking question where each method received a unique rank from 1 to 5. 

Q2. Visual Appeal (Rating) “On a scale from ‘Very Low’ to ‘Very High’, how would you rate the visual appeal of each creation?” 

Note: This was a 5-point Likert scale (1 =Very Low, 5 =Very High) applied inde-pendently to each result. 

Q3. Content Recognizability (Rating) “How well can the shape and struc-ture of the original object be recognized in each result?” 

Note: This was a 5-point Likert scale (e.g., 1 =Very Difficult, 5 =Very Easy) applied independently to each result. 

Aggregated results. The aggregated results from all 37 participants are pre-sented both graphically in the main paper and numerically in this supplement. Fig. 6 in the main paper visualizes the detailed distribution of participant re-sponses for each question. For Q1, it depicts the cumulative vote count for each rank, while for Q2 and Q3, it shows the full distribution of 5-point Likert-scale Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 3

Fig. A: A screenshot of the user study interface on the online survey platform. 4 M. H. Bang et al. 

ratings. To provide a concise statistical summary of these distributions, we report the mean scores for all three questions in Table B. Together with the distribu-tions shown in Fig. 6, these results demonstrate that our method was consistently preferred by participants, achieving the highest ratings across all evaluation cri-teria. 

# C Additional Ablation Studies 

Additional ablation study on optimization strategies. In Fig. B, we com-pare four optimization strategies for 3D style transfer: only geometry, only color, joint-step, and our decoupled optimization. Only geometry optimization focuses on structural deformation, effectively embedding geometric traits of the target style but lacking color variation, which results in visually incomplete stylization. On the other hand, only color optimization preserves scene geometry but limits style transfer to surface appearance, resulting in weak spatial integration of the style. The joint-step approach updates geometry and color simultaneously, yield-ing stronger stylization effects but often overfitting to the style appearance. Our decoupled optimization achieves a balanced integration of color and geometry, enabling geometry-aware stylization that effectively reflects geometric character-istics of the target style while maintaining appropriate color stylization. Fig. C additionally illustrates the results of only geometry optimization. Al-though it lacks color expressiveness, it still captures structural cues characteristic of the target style, producing distinctive surface reliefs and geometry-aware styl-ization effects. This observation suggests that geometry-based modulation can serve as a useful component for structural enhancement in 3D style transfer frameworks. 

Ablation study on scale control. In Fig. D, we investigate the effect of the target texture scale. Here, the scale is defined relative to the default target tex-ture resolution of 256 × 256 : 0.5×, 1×, and 2× correspond to resized resolutions of 128 × 128 , 256 × 256 , and 512 × 512 , respectively. This parameter controls the strength and granularity of the transferred texture patterns, thereby affecting the balance between structural stability and stylistic deformation. At a smaller scale ( e.g ., 0.5×), the target texture is downsampled to 128 ×128 ,which suppresses excessive geometric changes and helps preserve the original scene structure. The default scale ( 1×) provides a balanced result between ge-ometry preservation and texture transfer. In contrast, a larger scale ( e.g ., 2×)uses a higher-resolution target texture of 512 × 512 , allowing more pronounced and expressive geometric patterns to appear in the stylized result. This qual-itative analysis shows that the target texture scale provides a flexible control mechanism for adaptively balancing structural fidelity and stylistic expressive-ness. 

Ablation study on the geometry/color update ratio. We investigate the impact of varying the ratio between geometry and color updates within each Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 5

Table B: User study results. Average scores of 2,368 responses from 37 participants: Q1 – Style Similarity (↓), Q2 – Visual Appeal (↑), and Q3 – Content Recognizability 

(↑). Methods Q1 ↓ Q2 ↑ Q3 ↑               

> StyleGaussian [21] 4.78 1.95 1.90 G-Style [18] 2.64 3.65 3.83 SGSST [4] 2.26 3.74 3.70 CLIPGaussian [8] 3.55 3.45 4.19 Ours 1.75 4.07 4.32

Table C: Ablation study on the geometry/color update ratio. Comparison of SIFID scores across different Ng/Nc values.           

> Ng030 60 90 (ours) 100 SIFID ↓1.5244 1.3272 1.2526 1.1736 1.1885

optimization cycle. Each cycle consists of 100 iterations, where Ng and Nc de-note the number of geometry and color update steps, respectively, such that 

Ng + Nc = 100 . Table C presents the SIFID scores across different update ra-tios. Our configuration ( Ng = 90 , Nc = 10 ) achieves the best perceptual score, indicating a balanced trade-off between stylization strength and geometric sta-bility. In Fig. E, we present qualitative results showing the effect of varying the geometry/color update ratio. A higher geometry ratio ( e.g ., Ng = 100 ) results in overly rigid structures with limited color adaptation, while a lower ratio ( e.g ., 

Ng = 30 ) weakens geometric stylization and leads to flatter structures. Our set-ting ( Ng = 90 ) yields vivid and spatially consistent stylization, demonstrating that a geometry-dominant update schedule is essential for stable and expressive 3D style transfer. 

Ablation study on GCFM hyperparameter. In Table D, we evaluate the sensitivity of our framework to the weighting factor λGC in GCFM. The SIFID scores remain largely consistent across a wide range of values, indicating that GCFM is robust to moderate variations in its weighting. When the term is not used ( i.e ., λGC = 0 ), the performance drops notably, suggesting that the GCFM plays a crucial role in guiding consistent stylization. Across a wide range of λGC 

values, our method produces stable and visually coherent stylization results. We adopt λGC = 2 .0 in all experiments, as it consistently provides visually appealing and structurally coherent results across diverse scenes. This result demonstrates that our method is robust to variations in λGC , producing consistent stylization quality with stable optimization behavior. 

# D Comparison with StylizedGS 

In Fig. F, we qualitatively compare our method with StylizedGS [36]. While StylizedGS achieves higher quantitative consistency (LPIPS and RMSE) un-der both short- and long-range evaluations, this can be attributed to its overly 6 M. H. Bang et al.             

> Table D: Ablation study on GCFM hyperparameter. SIFID remains stable across various weights, confirming that our method is robust to the choice of λGC .
> λGC 0.0 1.0 2.0 (ours) 5.0 10.0 SIFID ↓1.5718 1.1683 1.1736 1.1841 1.1878

smoothed and desaturated renderings rather than genuine structural coherence. As illustrated in the figure, StylizedGS tends to lose geometric details and fails to express distinctive style characteristics, yielding relatively flat and texture-suppressed outputs with diminished 3D structure. In contrast, our method pre-serves spatial geometry and reproduces vivid, structurally consistent stylization patterns. These results suggest that the high consistency scores of StylizedGS may not directly reflect superior visual quality, but rather a loss of stylization richness—whereas our framework achieves a balance between geometric coher-ence and expressive style fidelity. 

# E Additional Qualitative Results 

This section presents additional qualitative stylization results and comparative analyses. 

Scene-wise stylization results. Figs. G–L show stylization outcomes across multiple 3D scenes, including Garden , Flower , Train , Truck , Kitchen , and Fern .Figs. G and H present stylized results along with the corresponding depth maps, demonstrating that the geometric structure is effectively adapted to the tar-get style while preserving the original scene content. Figs. I-L further illustrate stylizations using all exemplar styles adopted in our framework, showing consis-tent geometry–appearance adaptation across diverse environments. Overall, our method successfully preserves the structural integrity of the scene while trans-ferring both color and geometric characteristics of the target style. 

Comparisons with other methods. Figs. M–P provide additional compar-isons with existing stylization approaches across diverse scenes and styles. Even under varying scene layouts and style characteristics, our method yields more stable and expressive stylizations than competing methods, maintaining geomet-ric clarity and spatially coherent style patterns throughout the 3D space. These results complement the quantitative analyses in the main paper and further validate the robustness and visual fidelity of our proposed framework. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 7

Fig. B: Qualitative comparison of optimization strategies. 8 M. H. Bang et al. 

Fig. C: Qualitative results of only geometry optimization. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 9

Fig. D: Qualitative results of target texture scale control. The scales 0.5×, 1×, and 

2× correspond to target texture resolutions of 128 × 128 , 256 × 256 , and 512 × 512 ,respectively. 

Fig. E: Qualitative results of the ablation study on the geometry/color update ratio. 10 M. H. Bang et al. 

Fig. F: Qualitative comparison with StylizedGS. 

Fig. G: Stylization results for the Garden scene, including corresponding depth maps. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 11 

Fig. H: Stylization results for the Flower scene, including corresponding depth maps. 

Fig. I: Train scene stylization results with nine exemplar styles. 12 M. H. Bang et al. 

Fig. J: Truck scene stylization results with nine exemplar styles. 

Fig. K: Kitchen scene stylization results with nine exemplar styles. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 13 

Fig. L: Fern scene stylization results with nine exemplar styles. 14 M. H. Bang et al. 

Fig. M: Qualitative comparison of the Trex and Horns scenes. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 15 

Fig. N: Qualitative comparison of the Garden and Trex scenes. 16 M. H. Bang et al. 

Fig. O: Qualitative comparison of the Horns and Trex scenes. Geometry-Aware Style Transfer in 3D Gaussian Splatting 17 

Fig. P: Qualitative comparison of the Horns and Flower scenes.