Compositional SVG Generation via VLM-Driven Hierarchical Semantic
Parsing
Sehwan Park1*
Taehoon Kim1*
Geonhee Han1
Dohyun Kim1
Seung Wook Kim2
Paul Hongsuck Seo1
1Dept. of CSE, Korea University
2KAIST AI
{shp216, kium100, rtrt505, a12s12, phseo}@korea.ac.kr
seungwookk@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
While Vision-Language Models (VLMs) excel
at visual reasoning, generating structured, ed-
itable Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) remains
a fundamental challenge. Existing pipelines
predominantly yield flat, semantically agnos-
tic collections of paths, where editing a single
object requires manually identifying its con-
stituent paths. To address this, we propose a
VLM-driven agentic framework for semantic
compositional SVG generation. Our pipeline
recursively parses visual scenes into seman-
tic and geometric hierarchies via top- down
decomposition, visual grounding, and prompt-
driven amodal occlusion recovery, ensuring
each component is geometrically complete.
Furthermore, we introduce the Semantic SVG
Benchmark with human-annotated semantic
groups and novel sub-component metrics (Se-
mantic Recall/Precision, PERE) to explicitly
evaluate structural compositionality and func-
tional editability. Experiments show that our
natively predicted structures surpass the upper
bounds of existing flat-generation methods in
both grouping quality and editability, while
maintaining state-of-the-art visual fidelity.
1
Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Anthropic,
2025a,b; Bai et al., 2025b; Google DeepMind,
2025; Bai et al., 2025a; Zhu et al., 2025; Qwen
Team, Alibaba Cloud, 2026) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in bridging textual seman-
tics with visual concepts. However, translating
this high-level semantic understanding into struc-
tured, manipulable visual representations remains
a fundamental challenge. Scalable Vector Graph-
ics (SVG) serve as an ideal medium to bridge this
gap, as they compose images using editable math-
ematical primitives. Yet, true manipulability re-
quires these primitives to be grouped into mean-
ingful semantic structures (e.g., organizing hun-
dreds of disparate curves into a distinct "head" or
FAILURE
Editability
Integrity
SUCCESS
Editability
Integrity
Remove
the crown
Flat paths
Collection of 
individual paths
Grouped paths
Hierarchical 
semantic grouping
(a) SVG generation
(b) Semantic editing
Figure 1: The necessity of semantic compositionality
in SVG generation. (a) Prior methods output a flat, un-
organized collection of paths, whereas our framework
constructs semantic-aligned hierarchical tree. (b) With-
out a hierarchical semantic structure, downstream edits
(e.g., removing the crown) fail because individual paths
are decoupled from human-interpretable concepts. In
contrast, our explicit semantic grouping encapsulates
the entire target object into a single cohesive node, en-
abling successful and intuitive manipulation.
"body" group). Without such grouping, editing a
single object (e.g., moving, deleting) requires man-
ually identifying and selecting its constituent paths,
whereas encoding the semantic identity and geo-
metric completeness of each object directly in the
representation makes such edits far more reliable
and efficient.
Despite the necessity of this semantic structure,
existing SVG generation (Zhang et al., 2026; Wang
et al., 2026; Xing et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025; Ro-
driguez et al., 2025a; Yang et al., 2025; Rodriguez
et al., 2025b) pipelines predominantly yield flat,
semantically agnostic outputs. Whether relying
on low-level optimization-based tracing (Li et al.,
2020; Vision Cortex, 2023) or direct sequence gen-
eration from VLMs (Zhang et al., 2026; Wang
et al., 2026; Rodriguez et al., 2025a; Yang et al.,
2025; Rodriguez et al., 2025b), current methods hit
a fundamental ceiling: they generate flat vector col-
arXiv:2609.14657v1  [cs.CV]  13 Sep 2026


lections that entirely miss the hierarchical semantic
organization necessary for intuitive human manipu-
lation and downstream reasoning. Recovering this
organization post hoc from an already vectorized
SVG (Yun and Choo, 2026) is likewise bounded
by the given paths, which may entangle multiple
objects or leave occluded regions unrecoverable.
To address this structural deficiency, we propose
a paradigm shift: moving from flat SVG generation
to semantic compositional SVG generation. We
introduce a dynamic hierarchical parsing pipeline
that leverages a multi-role VLM to recursively de-
compose a complex visual scene into semantically
atomic sub-components. By grounding seman-
tic concepts into pixel space, recovering occluded
background geometries, and assembling the vec-
tors into a structured markup, our approach ensures
each component is geometrically complete and in-
dependently manipulable. Furthermore, because
existing evaluation protocols in recent works mea-
sure only holistic, whole-image visual fidelity, they
are fundamentally incapable of assessing the inter-
nal semantic validity of the generated components.
To solve this, we introduce the human-annotated
Semantic SVG Benchmark together with Semantic
Recall and Precision, which evaluate the quality of
semantic grouping, and the Post-Edit Rendering Er-
ror (PERE), which measures functional editability
by simulating a structural edit.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• Semantic Compositional SVG Task and
Benchmark: We formally propose the task of
generating semantically grouped SVGs, and
introduce the first benchmark with human-
annotated semantic groups along with metrics
that evaluate semantic compositionality and
functional editability rather than mere whole-
image fidelity.
• Dynamic Hierarchical Parsing Pipeline: We
introduce a VLM-driven framework that
parses visual scenes into compositional struc-
tures, integrating semantic grounding, tar-
geted occlusion recovery, and assembly into
a grouped SVG.
• State-of-the-Art Performance: Our experi-
ments establish a rigorous baseline for this
new task, showing that our pipeline outper-
forms existing flat-generation methods even
when they are augmented with optimal post-
hoc grouping.
2
Related Work
SVG Generation
Existing SVG generation
methods fall into two paradigms: optimization-
based approaches (Vision Cortex, 2023; Li et al.,
2020) that reconstruct paths via low-level pixel
clustering, and VLM-driven methods (Xing et al.,
2025; Yang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2026; Ro-
driguez et al., 2025a; Zhang et al., 2026; Rodriguez
et al., 2025b; Wu et al., 2025) that predict token se-
quences or iteratively peel occluding layers. Both
produce flat representations, omitting structural
metadata such as semantically nested <g> groups.
Vector Prism (Yun and Choo, 2026) restores such
grouping post hoc, yet remains bounded by the
input vectorization, unable to subdivide entangled
paths or recover occluded geometry. We instead
emit paths only after decomposing the scene into
meaningful components. This blind spot extends
to evaluation: existing benchmarks (Wang et al.,
2026; Yang et al., 2025; Rodriguez et al., 2025a;
Xing et al., 2025; Rodriguez et al., 2026) rely on
whole-image similarity, lacking part-level metrics.
We therefore introduce a benchmark with human-
annotated semantic groups, a Semantic Recall/Pre-
cision protocol, and the Post-Edit Rendering Error
(PERE) measuring functional editability.
Tool-Augmented Multimodal Agents
A paral-
lel thread augments foundation models with exter-
nal tools. Building on early paradigms of tool use
and reasoning-action interleaving (Schick et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023) and their scaling to broader
APIs and code-as-action policies (Qin et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024), recent work has shifted to-
ward long-horizon, multi-tool orchestration (Xu
et al., 2026; Luo et al., 2026). In multimodal set-
tings, LLaVA-Plus (Liu et al., 2024) equips LMMs
with vision-language tool repositories, and Visual
Sketchpad (Hu et al., 2024) extends tool use to self-
drawn artifacts, while concept-aware tools such as
SAM 3 (Carion et al., 2025) make tool-augmented
scene parsing practical. These systems use tools
as auxiliary modules for recognition, reasoning, or
short-form generation. In contrast, we use them
within a structural image-to-vector process, where
a single VLM assumes four cooperating roles—
Hierarchical Decomposer, Residual Judge, Occlu-
sion Assessor, and Amodal Spatial Estimator—and
recursively invokes segmentation, inpainting, and
vectorization tools whose outputs constitute the
final SVG.


Input image
Decomposable?
No
atomic 
All atomic?
No
Yes
✓
Yes
For each child node
Residual Judge
residual → new node / drop
Occluded?
For each leaf node ✓
<g id="sky">
<g id="sun">
<g id="beach">
<g id="sea">
<g id="sand">
<g id="parasol">
</g>
scene
├ sky
├ sun
├ beach
├ sea
├ sand
├ parasol
Semantic SVG 𝒮
Assemble
Editability ✓
Integrity ✓
Overview
Grounding
Decompose
③Inpainting
Inpainting
Outline 
Estimation
Inpainting
Outline 
Estimation
Vectorize
<g id="sea">
<path d="M ..>
<path d="M ..>
...
</g>
Vectorize
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Occluded?
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Semantic tree 𝒯
Figure 2: Overview of our VLM-driven agentic system for compositional SVG generation. (Top) Given an
input image, the VLM constructs a semantic tree T via top-down recursion: each node is evaluated for semantic
decomposability, and decomposable nodes are expanded through Decompose (child labels and boxes in back-to-
front order), Grounding (pixel masks), and a Residual Judge that promotes unassigned residual regions to new
nodes or discards them as noise. The loop recurses on every child node until all nodes are atomic. (Bottom) For
each leaf node, the VLM then judges occlusion: occluded leaves (e.g., the sea behind the sand and parasol) are
amodally completed via VLM outline estimation followed by inpainting, while unoccluded leaves pass through
unchanged. Every component is vectorized and assembled back-to-front into the semantic SVG S, whose nested
<g> hierarchy mirrors T , yielding intuitively editable (Editability) and structurally complete (Integrity) outputs.
3
Proposed Method
Our proposed framework transforms a raster image
into a semantic, compositional SVG. Rather than
generating flat vector sequences autoregressively,
we formulate this as a multimodal semantic parsing
problem, utilizing a multi-role Vision-Language
Model (VLM) to recursively parse the visual scene
into a semantic and geometric hierarchy.
3.1
Problem Formulation: Semantic
Compositional SVG Generation
Our objective is to translate a visual input I into
a semantically structured vector representation S.
We formulate this task as the generative modeling
of a hierarchical semantic tree T = (V, E).
In this directed tree, vertices V represent discrete
visual components, and edges E denote composi-
tional “part-of” relationships. Each node vi ∈V
is defined by a tuple vi = (li, Si), where li is an
explicit textual concept identifying the region. The
node set V is partitioned into intermediate nodes
and terminal leaf nodes L. For an intermediate
node, Si serves as a logical grouping mechanism
(mapped to an SVG <g> tag) that recursively en-
compasses its children. For a leaf node vk ∈L,
Sk represents a semantically atomic component,
which may consist of one or more mathematical
vector primitives to render its complete shape. The
final SVG S is derived by traversing T and nesting
the primitives according to z-order (background-
to-foreground) constraints.
3.2
Top-Down VLM-Driven Decomposition
To construct T , the pipeline executes a top-down
recursive decomposition. The VLM acts as the
core reasoning engine, converting visual complex-
ity into a structured semantic ontology, which is
then grounded into pixel space.
Hierarchical Semantic Decomposer
Starting
from the root image I, we traverse the tree. Given
an active node vi, the VLM receives the root image
and a textual prompt. Relying on its multimodal
priors, it evaluates the semantic decomposability
of vi. If deemed decomposable, it generates a
structured parsing plan: a sequence of child se-
mantic labels lj and bounding boxes bj ordered
back-to-front. If the node is evaluated as semanti-


cally atomic, it halts the descent and designates vi
as a terminal leaf node vk ∈L.
Semantic Grounding To physically execute the
VLM’s decomposition plan, the root image and
predicted constraints (lj, bj) are passed to the Seg-
ment Anything Model (SAM) (Carion et al., 2025).
Here, SAM grounds the VLM’s generated con-
cepts, extracting pixel masks corresponding to the
semantic labels.
VLM Residual Judge Semantic grounding rarely
achieves perfect pixel mutual exclusivity. We com-
pile any unassigned pixels into a residual image
and invoke the VLM as a Residual Judge. The
VLM evaluates the residuals to determine if they
constitute a missed semantic concept. If a valid se-
mantic identity is identified, the residual is labeled
and added to the tree as a new node; otherwise, it
is discarded as non-semantic noise.
Recursive Tree Expansion This decomposition
sequence is applied iteratively. The system dynam-
ically expands V and E via Breadth-First Search
(BFS), retaining the global image as a visual an-
chor while updating textual context at each depth
level, continuing until all branches terminate in
leaf nodes L.
3.3
Prompt-Driven Semantic Completion
Extracting foreground components during top-
down decomposition inherently leaves artificial
“holes” in the background elements. To restore
geometric integrity—which is absolutely vital to
ensure the final SVG components can be indepen-
dently edited by the user without revealing missing
background data—the terminal leaf nodes vk ∈L
undergo targeted occlusion recovery.
VLM Inpainting Judge
Executing generative
inpainting on every leaf is computationally inef-
ficient. The VLM acts as an Occlusion Assessor,
taking the isolated leaf image, root image, and
text label lk as inputs. By relying on explicitly
prompted geometric priors (e.g., instructions defin-
ing the silhouette of an occluder), the VLM classi-
fies whether true occlusion exists.
VLM-Guided Amodal Spatial Estimation For
occluded leaves, the VLM functions as a Spatial
Estimator. Given the leaf image and text label,
it predicts a high-resolution 2D polygon (30–50
vertices) outlining the inferred amodal (complete)
shape of the component.
Generative Inpainting
The target inpainting
mask is derived mathematically by subtracting
the visible SAM mask from the VLM-generated
amodal polygon.
This exact difference mask,
alongside the original leaf image and the textual
label prompt, is passed to an inpainting model to
recover the obscured geometry conditioned on the
semantic concept lk.
3.4
Semantic Markup Assembly
Once the visual components are fully isolated and
recovered, an external vectorizer translates the
pixel representations of the leaf nodes L into math-
ematical primitives. Finally, the tree T is compiled.
Because SVG is natively an XML-based markup
language, we construct the final output dynami-
cally in a bottom-up pass. We nest SVG group tags
(<g>) using the VLM-generated semantic labels
as identifiers (id="label"). This assembly yields
a final compositional SVG where the underlying
text file perfectly mirrors the semantic hierarchy
extracted by the VLM.
3.5
Extension to Text-to-SVG
Although our framework is designed for the Image-
to-SVG task, it naturally extends to Text-to-SVG
by cascading a Text-to-Image (T2I) model with our
pipeline. Given a text prompt P, we synthesize a
raster image Igen via a T2I diffusion model and
feed it directly into our pipeline as the root image
I. The semantic decomposition and grouping then
proceed identically to the Image-to-SVG case.
4
The Semantic SVG Benchmark
To establish a rigorous standard for semantic com-
positionality in SVG generation, we introduce the
Semantic SVG Benchmark. Because existing
datasets and metrics evaluate only whole-image
visual fidelity, they are incapable of measuring
whether an SVG is structured for intuitive down-
stream manipulation. Our benchmark explicitly
tests for semantic-visual alignment, geometric in-
tegrity, and structural decomposability.
Source Data and Subsampling
To rigorously
construct our benchmark, we collect candidate
SVGs as broadly as possible from two streams.
The first consists of evaluation benchmarks used
in prior work (Wang et al., 2026; Rodriguez et al.,
2025a), which span icons, complex illustrations,
and emojis. The second consists of publicly avail-
able web sources, whose full list and licenses are
provided in Sec. A.2.
Rigorous Filtering Criteria
To guarantee the
quality of the ground-truth annotations, we ap-
ply a strict manual filtering process. We retain


only images with a clearly decomposable seman-
tic structure, focusing on samples with substan-
tial occlusion and overlapping elements so that
trivial decomposition is impossible. We also ex-
clude automatically generated samples produced
by color-cluster-based optimization, whose paths
span multiple semantic regions and thus make a
faithful ground-truth grouping ill-defined. More
details are provided in Sec. A.3.
Human Annotation Process
Using a custom-
built web interface, annotators group raw SVG
paths into self-contained semantic entities (those
that retain their identity when separated from the
scene) and assign a textual label to each group.
Starting from the root image, they recursively split
each node until no meaningful decomposition re-
mains, at which point the node is designated a leaf.
More details are provided in Sec. A.3.
Benchmark Statistics The finalized benchmark
comprises 203 rigorously annotated test samples.
The semantic trees exhibit a maximum depth of
2 and a minimum depth of 1 (representing direct
children of the root), with a mean depth of 1.02. 1
Inter-Annotator Agreement To verify the relia-
bility of our annotations, each annotator addition-
ally labeled the samples originally annotated by the
other, yielding two independent semantic trees per
sample. We measure the agreement between the
two trees using our grouping-quality metrics, ob-
taining 0.0142 (MSE) and 0.9666 (DINO), which
indicates near-complete agreement. The annota-
tors agreed on the semantic structure in most cases,
and disagreements were confined to whether a few
individual paths, such as background or shadow
elements, belong to a given group.
4.1
Evaluating Semantic Grouping
Let G = {g1, . . . , gN} denote the set of non-root
GT nodes, and let R(·) be the rasterization op-
erator that renders a set of paths into an image.
We score the agreement between two rendered re-
gions with s(·, ·), instantiated as either pixel-level
MSE (lower is better) or DINO similarity (higher
is better), computed over the union bounding box
of the two renderings. Throughout, best denotes
optimization of s over the specified domain in
1On average, the root node contains 2.61 ± 0.86 immediate
semantic child components (median 2, range 2–8). Each
image yields 2.64 ± 0.88 leaf nodes (median 2, range 2–8),
and each leaf groups 7.53 ± 6.14 raw SVG paths on average
(median 6, range 1–40), with the entire benchmark covering
535 leaves and 4,029 raw paths in total.
the metric-appropriate direction: minimization for
MSE and maximization for DINO similarity.
Given a generated SVG, let Q denote its com-
plete set of drawable paths, with |Q| = K. Each
path in Q is treated as an atomic unit of grouping,
and a candidate group p ⊆Q is formed by jointly
rendering a subset of these paths as a single compo-
nent. We denote by P the set of candidate groups
against which GT nodes are matched.
For methods that natively output semantic
groups (predicted), P = {p1, . . . , pM} is simply
the set of predicted groups, excluding the root. Flat
baselines, however, provide no such set. In this
case (optimal), for each GT node gi, we select the
subset of generated paths that best reconstructs it:
p⋆
i = arg min
p⊆Q
MSE
 R(p), R(gi)

.
(1)
We then use p⋆
i as the representative group of
that baseline for gi, yielding P = {p⋆
1, . . . , p⋆
N}.
The exact solution defines the best GT-conditioned
group that can be formed from the baseline’s paths
and therefore an upper bound on its grouping qual-
ity. In practice, we approximate this combinato-
rial search using the greedy algorithm detailed in
Sec. B.2.
Semantic Recall We evaluate how well the GT
semantic concepts are captured by the generated
output, by scoring each GT node against the candi-
date group that best reconstructs it:
Recall = 1
|G|
X
gi∈G
best
pj∈P s
 R(pj), R(gi)

.
(2)
Semantic Precision Conversely, we evaluate the
validity of the generated groups by scoring each
of them against the GT node it best reconstructs,
which penalizes arbitrary or semantically meaning-
less clusters:
Precision =
1
|P|
X
pj∈P
best
gi∈G s
 R(pj), R(gi)

.
(3)
Since P is constructed per GT node in the optimal
setting, Precision is evaluated only in the predicted
setting, where groups are produced independently
of the GT.
4.2
Evaluating Editability and Geometric
Integrity
Merely predicting a grouped structure is insuffi-
cient; if those groups cannot be seamlessly manip-
ulated by a user, the grouping itself is not useful.


To measure this functional editability, we introduce
the Post-Edit Rendering Error (PERE), which sim-
ulates the most basic editing operation, deleting an
object, and examines what the edit leaves behind.
A faithful deletion requires two properties at once:
the removed group must contain exactly the paths
of that object, and the geometry it had occluded
must be recovered so that no hole is exposed.
Let E(S, g) denote the image obtained by delet-
ing group g from an SVG S and rendering the
result. Given a GT sample S with generated coun-
terpart ˆS, we enumerate the pairs of depth-1 GT
groups whose amodal masks intersect, and take
the front object of each pair as the deletion target,
yielding a set of GT occluders O. For each o ∈O,
we locate its counterpart in the generated SVG by
rendering every candidate group in isolation and
taking the closest match,
ˆo = arg min
p∈P
MSE
 R(p), R(o)

,
(4)
and then delete the two counterparts and compare
the resulting images over the full frame:
PERE =
1
|O|
X
o∈O
MSE
 E( ˆS, ˆo), E(S, o)

, (5)
which we then average over the benchmark. Here
P is the set of predicted groups for our method,
and is defined as in Equation (1) for flat baselines.
A high PERE indicates a practical failure in com-
positionality: the model either grouped unrelated
paths together, causing unintended elements to dis-
appear, or failed to recover the occluded geometry,
exposing a hole where the object had been. Further
details are provided in Sec. B.2.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental Settings
Baselines For the Image-to-SVG task, we compare
our method against dedicated VLM-based SVG
generation models (OmniSVG-8B (Yang et al.,
2025), InternSVG-8B (Wang et al., 2026), StarVec-
tor (Rodriguez et al., 2025a), LayerPeeler (Wu
et al., 2025)), a representative optimization-
based baseline (VTracer (Vision Cortex, 2023)),
and general-purpose VLMs, namely open-source
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B (Qwen Team, Alibaba Cloud,
2026) and proprietary Gemini-3-flash (Google
DeepMind, 2025), both prompted with a dedi-
cated instruction for semantic <g> grouping. For
the Text-to-SVG task, we extend our pipeline
with FLUX.1-dev (Black Forest Labs, 2024a) and
SD3.5-medium (Esser et al., 2024) as the text-to-
image models, fine-tuned with LoRA (Hu et al.,
2022) on our target domain, and compare against
OmniSVG-8B, InternSVG-8B, and the same two
general-purpose VLMs under the identical group-
ing prompts.Training details for the text-to-image
models are provided in Sec. B.1.
Evaluation We evaluate Image-to-SVG models
on the Semantic SVG Benchmark using Semantic
Recall and Precision (MSE and DINO), Post-Edit
Rendering Error (PERE) and whole-image fidelity
(MSE and DINO). In the optimal setting, flat base-
lines are evaluated using GT-conditioned post-hoc
path selection, approximated by the greedy search
detailed in Sec. B.2. For Text-to-SVG, we evaluate
generation quality and text alignment on MMSVG-
Bench (Yang et al., 2025) using FID, CLIP, HPSv2,
and Aesthetic scores.
Implementation Details
We employ Gemini-
3-flash (Google DeepMind, 2025) as the default
VLM agent. For external vision tools, we use
SAM 3 (Carion et al., 2025) for semantic ground-
ing, Flux-Fill (Black Forest Labs, 2024b) for occlu-
sion recovery, and VTracer (Vision Cortex, 2023)
for vectorization. All experiments are conducted
on two NVIDIA Blackwell B200 GPUs. More
implementation details are in Sec. B.
5.2
Results
Grouping Quality Tab. 1 presents the quantitative
results on the Image-to-SVG task, evaluated on our
Semantic SVG Benchmark. Since flat generation
baselines do not output semantic groups, we grant
them their optimal path combination as a group so
that Recall can at least be measured. While the
two general-purpose VLMs do produce grouped
outputs when explicitly prompted, their predicted
groups fall well behind their own optimal bounds,
indicating that they do not group accurately. Ours
(optimal) achieves the best Recall in both MSE
(0.0091) and DINO (0.9571), and Ours (predicted)
relies solely on native predictions yet still surpasses
the optimal configurations of all baselines across
every grouping metric. This does not come at the
cost of reconstruction quality: our whole-image
fidelity is comparable to VTracer and far ahead of
the generative baselines, while VTracer, despite its
strong fidelity and the favorable optimal grouping
granted to it, still falls short of our predicted groups
in Recall (0.0227 vs. 0.0174 in MSE, 0.9392 vs.
0.9487 in DINO).


Table 1: Quantitative Results on Image-to-SVG task with grouped metrics. The optimal represents a theoretical
upper bound via post-hoc GT matching (yielding only Recall for flat baselines), while predicted evaluates natively
generated structural metadata. Notably, our purely predicted structures surpass the optimal bounds of baselines in
grouping quality and functional editability, while maintaining highly competitive whole-image visual fidelity. The
best and second-best results are highlighted in bold and underlined, respectively.
Methods
Grouping
Grouping quality (MSE)↓
Grouping quality (DINO)↑
Editability
Whole Image
Recall
Precision
F1
Recall
Precision
F1
PERE↓
MSE↓
DINO↑
VTracer
optimal
.0227
N/A
N/A
.9392
N/A
N/A
.0400
.0036
.9922
OmniSVG
optimal
.0679
N/A
N/A
.8276
N/A
N/A
.1675
.1629
.7853
InternSVG
optimal
.0531
N/A
N/A
.8581
N/A
N/A
.0834
.0847
.8390
StarVector
optimal
.0790
N/A
N/A
.7730
N/A
N/A
.0969
.1156
.7480
LayerPeeler
optimal
.0295
N/A
N/A
.9040
N/A
N/A
.0398
.0339
.9148
Gemini-3-flash
optimal
.0389
N/A
N/A
.8983
N/A
N/A
.0754
.0670
.9139
predicted
.0724
.0904
.0787
.8937
.8274
.8589
.0921
.0670
.9139
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B
optimal
.0699
N/A
N/A
.8471
N/A
N/A
.0991
.1070
.8409
predicted
.0801
.0710
.0729
.7677
.7413
.7538
.0970
.1070
.8409
Ours
optimal
.0091
N/A
N/A
.9571
N/A
N/A
.0198
.0049
.9845
predicted
.0174
.0195
.0155
.9487
.9426
.9453
.0210
.0049
.9845
GT
Ours (pred)
Qwen-3.6-35B
VTracer
OmniSVG
InternSVG
StarVector
LayerPeeler
Whole Image
Tram
Residual
Gemini-3-flash
Figure 3: Qualitative Results on the Image-to-SVG Task. For each scenario, we show the whole image, isolated
semantic object, and residual background. The whole image in the GT column is also used as the input image for
all methods. Ours (pred) denotes the group (set of primitives) predicted by our model. For all remaining generated
outputs, we show the semantic object rendered from paths selected using an optimal post-hoc grouping strategy.
Our method effectively isolates discrete entities and recovers occluded background geometry through high-quality
amodal inpainting.
Semantic Editability
Beyond static structure,
we assess whether the generated groups are practi-
cally usable through the Post-Edit Rendering Error
(PERE). Our predicted groups reduce PERE by
47.5% relative to VTracer (0.0400 vs. 0.0210), re-
maining ahead of every baseline even under their
optimal configurations. Flat-generation methods
fail this dynamic evaluation because they merge
distinct objects sharing a color into a single entan-
gled path, or leave visible holes where an occluding
component is removed. Our pipeline instead di-
vides regions per object and recovers the occluded
background through amodal inpainting, enabling
clean downstream edits.
Qualitative Results Fig. 3 compares the whole
image, isolated semantic object, and residual back-
ground (rows) across methods (columns). Remov-
ing the foreground tram exposes holes in the back-
ground geometry produced by VTracer, while most
other baselines fail to reconstruct the target image
coherently. VTracer also merges similarly colored
regions from different objects into a single path. In
contrast, our pipeline isolates components through
semantic decomposition and recovers occluded ge-
ometry through amodal inpainting. Consequently,
Ours (pred) closely matches the GT in both object
isolation and background completeness, showing
that native predictions alone support clean edits.


Table 2: Human editability study. Two participants
performed move and remove edits (15 samples each) on
the outputs of our method and VTracer, with each edit
specified by a before/after target derived from the GT
SVGs. Avg. time is the mean time taken to complete
an edit, and Completed is the number of edits finished
without giving up. MSE measures the pixel-level error
between the edited result and the target image from
ground-truth data, computed over completed edits only.
The best results are highlighted in bold.
Edit
Model
Avg. time↓
Completed↑
MSE↓
Move
VTracer
37.4 s
11/15
0.057
Ours
22.2 s
15/15
0.025
Remove
VTracer
15.5 s
13/15
0.023
Ours
7.5 s
15/15
0.006
User Study on Semantic Editability
While
PERE quantifies editability by simulating struc-
tural edits, we further verify whether these struc-
tures actually help users perform edits. Tab. 2 re-
ports a user study in which participants reproduce
a target edit—moving or removing objects—on the
outputs of our method and VTracer. The editing
environment respects the group structure of each
SVG, so that selecting a group manipulates all of
its paths at once, while ungrouped paths must be
selected individually; participants could give up
when the edit seemed impossible. All edits on
our SVGs were completed, roughly 1.9× faster,
since an object can be manipulated as a single unit.
The gain is largest for removal, where amodal in-
painting restores the occluded regions and yields a
substantially lower MSE (0.006 vs. 0.023).
Impact of the Backbone VLM
We evaluate
the influence of the backbone VLM by comparing
our default model, Gemini-3-flash, with Qwen3.6-
35B-A3B, GPT-5, and Claude-Sonnet-4.6 in Tab. 3.
Among the backbones, Gemini-3-flash performs
best across all metrics and Claude follows, match-
ing or exceeding most baselines in Tab. 1 and
remaining comparable to the strongest baseline
VTracer in PERE, even though its groups are na-
tively predicted while VTracer is granted its op-
timal post-hoc grouping. GPT-5, in contrast, of-
ten under-segments and at times leaves the scene
undecomposed altogether, so the pipeline vector-
izes the input as a whole without amodal recovery,
which explains its high whole-image fidelity de-
spite poor grouping. Qwen’s lower performance
mainly stems from its limited box localization dur-
ing decomposition, and this spatial inaccuracy cas-
Ours (FLUX)
Qwen-3.6-35B
OmniSVG
InternSVG
Gemini-3-flash
Ours (SD3.5)
Whole Image
Cat
Residual
Whole Image
Magnifying glass
Residual
Figure 4: Qualitative Results on Text-to-SVG task.
Generated SVGs for the prompts “A cat sleeping on top
of a stack of books” (top) and “A magnifying glass over
a folded map” (bottom). For each scenario, we show
the whole image, the isolated semantic object, and the
residual background. OmniSVG and InternSVG pro-
duce no semantic grouping, so their object and residual
rows are empty.
cades directly into functional editability. Such dif-
ferences arise because the backbone must localize
sub-parts before our pipeline converts them into
editable groups, so structural quality naturally fol-
lows its spatial reasoning capability. This confirms
that while our top-down strategy inherently im-
proves structural integrity, a spatially precise agent
such as Gemini-3-flash is essential for maximizing
semantic atomicity.
Impact of Generative Occlusion Recovery We
evaluate the necessity of our prompt-driven amodal
inpainting module by comparing our pipeline with
and without it in Tab. 4. When the inpainting mod-
ule is disabled (✗), the pipeline still predicts se-
mantic groups but fundamentally acts as a standard
mask-and-crop system, strictly extracting only vis-
ible pixels. As a result, both grouping quality and
functional editability deteriorate. Enabling genera-
tive occlusion recovery (✓) improves every metric,
most notably reducing Grouping F1 in MSE by
41.1% and PERE by 31.6%. This demonstrates
that recovering the full, unoccluded geometry of
a semantic component ensures the generated SVG
paths accurately align with the true physical struc-
ture of the ground-truth objects, rather than just
their fragmented, visible remnants.


Table 3: Ablation on Backbone VLM. We evaluate the impact of utilizing different VLMs, specifically Qwen3.6-
35B-A3B (Qwen Team, Alibaba Cloud, 2026), GPT-5 (OpenAI, 2025), Claude-Sonnet-4.6 (Anthropic, 2026),
and Gemini-3-flash (Google DeepMind, 2025), as the structural reasoning agent within our framework. Grouping
quality metrics for our method are measured natively on explicitly predicted grouping structures, whereas the
baseline VTracer is evaluated using its optimal path combinations.
Method
Backbone VLM
Grouping quality (MSE)↓
Grouping quality (DINO)↑
Editability
Whole Image
Recall
Precision
F1
Recall
Precision
F1
PERE↓
MSE↓
DINO↑
VTracer
-
.0227
N/A
N/A
.9392
N/A
N/A
.0400
.0036
.9922
Ours
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B
.0666
.0535
.0555
.8541
.8641
.8576
.0787
.0123
.9588
GPT-5
.0629
.0427
.0465
.8665
.8945
.8789
.0733
.0063
.9771
Claude-Sonnet-4.6
.0457
.0417
.0402
.8869
.8727
.8788
.0491
.0076
.9717
Gemini-3-flash
.0174
.0195
.0155
.9487
.9426
.9453
.0210
.0049
.9845
Table 4: Ablation on the Inpainting Module. We evaluate the impact of utilizing amodal inpainting during the
semantic grouping process. Grouping quality metrics for our method are measured natively on explicitly predicted
grouping structures.
Inpainting
Grouping quality (MSE)↓
Grouping quality (DINO)↑
Editability
Whole Image
Recall
Precision
F1
Recall
Precision
F1
PERE↓
MSE↓
DINO↑
✗
.0269
.0258
.0263
.9337
.9282
.9310
.0307
.0063
.9844
✓
.0174
.0195
.0155
.9487
.9426
.9453
.0210
.0049
.9845
Table 5: Quantitative evaluation on Text-to-SVG
task. Evaluated on 300 prompts from MMSVG-Bench
following its protocol. Ours (SD3.5) and Ours (FLUX)
denote our pipeline using SD3.5-medium and FLUX.1-
dev as the text-to-image model, respectively.
Methods
FID↓
CLIP↑
HPSv2↑
Aesthetic↑
OmniSVG
138.91
0.2435
0.2328
4.558
InternSVG
146.18
0.2530
0.2343
4.592
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B
184.72
0.2900
0.2611
5.075
Gemini-3-flash
166.03
0.3060
0.2673
5.016
Ours (SD3.5)
157.91
0.3017
0.2657
5.051
Ours (FLUX)
171.72
0.3076
0.2732
5.248
Evaluation on Text-to-SVG Generation Tab. 5
presents the Text-to-SVG quantitative evaluation.
Both of our variants substantially outperform the
baselines, with FLUX achieving the best CLIP,
HPSv2, and Aesthetic scores. While OmniSVG
reports the lowest FID, this is an evaluation ar-
tifact: the ground-truth images used to compute
FID are derived directly from its own training data,
biasing the metric toward that distribution. Vi-
sual comparisons in Fig. 4 further support these re-
sults. OmniSVG and InternSVG fail entirely, and
although Qwen and Gemini produce reasonable
layouts, individual objects are often rendered with
low fidelity. Both of our variants instead synthe-
size the scene faithfully. Furthermore, separating a
generated SVG into its predicted foreground and
residual background shows that the occluded ge-
ometry behind the foreground remains structurally
complete, thanks to our prompt-driven amodal in-
painting. These results show that our framework
extends naturally to Text-to-SVG, producing out-
puts that are faithful to the prompt while retaining
the same semantic grouping and geometric com-
pleteness.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we address a fundamental limitation
of existing SVG generation methods, which pro-
duce flat, semantically agnostic collections of paths
that are difficult to manipulate. To resolve this, we
reframe the task as semantic compositional SVG
generation, where a multi-role VLM recursively
decomposes a scene into geometrically complete,
language-aligned components. To evaluate this
new paradigm, we introduce the human-annotated
Semantic SVG Benchmark together with the sub-
component metrics Semantic Recall/Precision and
Post-Edit Rendering Error. Our pipeline natively
generates semantic structures that surpass the op-
timal post-hoc groupings of existing baselines in
both grouping quality and functional editability,
while preserving state-of-the-art visual fidelity. We
believe this establishes a foundation for producing
practically manipulable vector graphics.


Limitations
The main limitation of our frame-
work is computational cost. On our 203-image cu-
rated benchmark, each image required on average
16.3 Gemini-3-flash calls (3.5 decompose + 3.9
occlusion judge + 7.1 polygon + 1.8 pick), costing
$0.21 per image (median $0.20; total $42.06). End-
to-end latency averaged 255 s per image (median
254 s), of which 94.9% was spent on sequential
FLUX.1-Fill-dev inference (∼15 GB bf16 GPU,
30 denoising steps at 1024×1024, four polygon
variants per occluded part) and only 5.0% on hier-
archical decomposition. Since our pipeline is inher-
ently modular, this bottleneck can be largely miti-
gated by asynchronous processing across stages.
Acknowledgements
This research was sup-
ported by MSIT (IITP: IITP-2026-RS-2024-
00436857, RS-2024-00398115, IITP-2026-RS-
2020-II201819, IITP-2026-RS-2025-02304828,
RS-2026-25507282, RS-2026-25585074; NRF:
RS-2025-23523979), MCST (KOCCA: RS-2026-
25506607, RS-2024-00345025), MND (RS-2026-
25551943) and MSS (RS-2026-25549378). This
research was also supported by the “Advanced
GPU Utilization Support Program” funded by the
Government of the Republic of Korea (MSIT).
References
Anthropic. 2025a.
Claude 3.7 sonnet system card.
Technical report, Anthropic.
Anthropic. 2025b. Claude 4 system card. Technical
report, Anthropic.
Anthropic. 2026. Claude sonnet 4.6 system card. Tech-
nical report, Anthropic.
Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen,
Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei
Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhi-
fang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang,
Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng
Li, and 45 others. 2025a. Qwen3-VL technical re-
port. Preprint, arXiv:2511.21631.
Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-
bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shi-
jie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu,
Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei
Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, and 8 oth-
ers. 2025b. Qwen2.5-VL technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.13923.
Black Forest Labs. 2024a. FLUX. https://github.
com/black-forest-labs/flux.
Black
Forest
Labs.
2024b.
FLUX.1
Fill.
https://huggingface.co/black-forest-labs/
FLUX.1-Fill-dev.
FLUX.1 Tools,
released
November 2024.
Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu,
Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris,
Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham
Khedr, Andrew Huang, Jie Lei, Tengyu Ma, Bais-
han Guo, Arpit Kalla, Markus Marks, Joseph Greer,
Meng Wang, Peize Sun, Roman Rädle, and 19 oth-
ers. 2025. SAM 3: Segment anything with concepts.
Preprint, arXiv:2511.16719.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim
Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Do-
minik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin
Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, and Robin
Rombach. 2024. Scaling rectified flow transformers
for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML), pages 12606–12633.
Google DeepMind. 2025.
Gemini 3 Flash Pre-
view. https://blog.google/products/gemini/
gemini-3-flash/. Accessed: 2026-05-25.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. 2022.
Classifier-
free
diffusion
guidance.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2207.12598.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of
large language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Xingyu Fu, Dan Roth, Mari Os-
tendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Ran-
jay Krishna. 2024. Visual sketchpad: Sketching as
a visual chain of thought for multimodal language
models. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS).
Tzu-Mao Li, Michal Lukáˇc, Michaël Gharbi, and
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. 2020. Differentiable vec-
tor graphics rasterization for editing and learning.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH
Asia), 39(6).
Shilong Liu, Hao Cheng, Haotian Liu, Hao Zhang, Feng
Li, Tianhe Ren, Xueyan Zou, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su,
Jun Zhu, Lei Zhang, Jianfeng Gao, and Chunyuan
Li. 2024. LLaVA-Plus: Learning to use tools for
creating multimodal agents. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Haipeng Luo, Huawen Feng, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu,
Kai Zheng, Yufei Wang, Tao Yang, Han Hu, and Yan-
song Tang. 2026. AgentMath: Empowering math-
ematical reasoning for large language models via
tool-augmented agent. In The Fourteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
OpenAI. 2025. GPT-5 system card.


Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni,
Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fer-
nandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin
El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Woj-
ciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-
Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rabbat, Vasu Sharma,
and 7 others. 2024. DINOv2: Learning robust vi-
sual features without supervision. Transactions on
Machine Learning Research (TMLR).
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan
Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang,
Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian,
Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li,
Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ToolLLM:
Facilitating large language models to master 16000+
real-world APIs. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR).
Qwen Team,
Alibaba Cloud. 2026.
Qwen3.6-
35B-A3B.
https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3.
6. Accessed: 2026-05-25.
Juan Rodriguez, Haotian Zhang, Abhay Puri, Tianyang
Zhang, Rishav Pramanik, Meng Lin, Xiaoqing Xie,
Marco Terral, Darsh Kaushik, Aly Shariff, Perouz
Taslakian, Spandana Gella, Sai Rajeswar, David
Vazquez, Christopher Pal, and Marco Pedersoli.
2026. VectorGym: A multitask benchmark for SVG
code generation, sketching, and editing. Preprint,
arXiv:2603.29852.
Juan A. Rodriguez, Abhay Puri, Shubham Agarwal,
Issam H. Laradji, Pau Rodriguez, Sai Rajeswar,
David Vazquez, Christopher Pal, and Marco Peder-
soli. 2025a. StarVector: Generating scalable vector
graphics code from images and text. In Proceed-
ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference (CVPR), pages 16175–16186.
Juan A. Rodriguez, Haotian Zhang, Abhay Puri, Aarash
Feizi, Rishav Pramanik, Pascal Wichmann, Arnab
Mondal, Mohammad Reza Samsami, Rabiul Awal,
Perouz Taslakian, Spandana Gella, Sai Rajeswar,
David Vazquez, Christopher Pal, and Marco Ped-
ersoli. 2025b. Rendering-aware reinforcement learn-
ing for vector graphics generation. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 38.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Vision Cortex. 2023.
VTracer.
https://www.
visioncortex.org/vtracer-docs.
Accessed:
2026-05-25.
Haomin Wang, Jinhui Yin, Qi Wei, Wenguang Zeng,
Lixin Gu, Shenglong Ye, Zhangwei Gao, Yaohui
Wang, Yanting Zhang, Yuanqi Li, Yanwen Guo, Wen-
hai Wang, Kai Chen, Yu Qiao, and Hongjie Zhang.
2026. InternSVG: Towards unified SVG tasks with
multimodal large language models. In The Four-
teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR).
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang,
Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2024. Executable
code actions elicit better LLM agents. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML).
Ronghuan Wu, Wanchao Su, and Jing Liao. 2025. Lay-
erPeeler: Autoregressive peeling for layer-wise im-
age vectorization. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH
Asia 2025 Conference Papers, SIGGRAPH Asia ’25,
New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing
Machinery.
Ximing Xing, Juncheng Hu, Guotao Liang, Jing Zhang,
Dong Xu, and Qian Yu. 2025. Empowering LLMs
to understand and generate complex vector graph-
ics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Haoyuan Xu, Chang Li, Xinyan Ma, Xianhao Ou, Zihan
Zhang, Tao He, Xiangyu Liu, Zixiang Wang, Jiafeng
Liang, Zheng Chu, Runxuan Liu, Rongchuan Mu,
Ming Liu, and Bing Qin. 2026. The evolution of tool
use in LLM agents: From single-tool call to multi-
tool orchestration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22862.
Yiying Yang, Wei Cheng, Sijin Chen, Xianfang Zeng,
Fukun Yin, Jiaxu Zhang, Liao Wang, Gang Yu,
Xingjun Ma, and Yu-Gang Jiang. 2025. OmniSVG:
A unified scalable vector graphics generation model.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, volume 38, pages 126110–126136.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Jooyeol Yun and Jaegul Choo. 2026. Vector Prism:
Animating vector graphics by stratifying semantic
structure. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
Peiying Zhang, Nanxuan Zhao, Matthew Fisher, Yiran
Xu, Jing Liao, and Difan Liu. 2026. DuetSVG: Uni-
fied multimodal SVG generation with internal visual
guidance. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR), pages
10219–10229.
Jinguo Zhu, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Zhaoyang Liu,
Shenglong Ye, Lixin Gu, Hao Tian, Yuchen Duan,
Weijie Su, Jie Shao, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Xue-
hui Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Xingguang Wei,
Hongjie Zhang, Haomin Wang, Weiye Xu, and 32
others. 2025. InternVL3: Exploring advanced train-
ing and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10479.


A
Semantic SVG Benchmark Details
A.1
Comparison with Existing SVG Datasets
Tab. 6 compares our benchmark with SVG-
Bench (Rodriguez et al., 2025a),
MMSVG-
Bench (Yang et al., 2025), SArena (Wang et al.,
2026), and VectorGym (Rodriguez et al., 2026)
in terms of their domains, semantic group annota-
tions, and evaluation metrics. These benchmarks
cover diverse SVG domains but do not provide
semantic group annotations. Our benchmark in-
cludes path-level semantic group annotations and
supports component-level grouping metrics and
PERE in addition to whole-image MSE and DINO.
A.2
Source Data and Licenses
We surveyed the SVG-based evaluation sets
of
prior
SVG
generation
work,
including
SArena (Wang et al., 2026), SVG-Bench (Ro-
driguez et al., 2025a), MMSVG-Bench (Yang et al.,
2025), and the test set of LayerPeeler (Wu et al.,
2025). After cross-set de-duplication and the fil-
tering described in Sec. A.3, the retained sam-
ples from prior benchmarks came from only two
sources: the icon and illustration subsets of SArena
and the SVG-Emoji test subset of StarVector’s
SVG-Bench.
These samples constitute the re-
annotated portion of our benchmark.
The remaining samples were collected directly
from the primary repositories of publicly avail-
able emoji and clipart projects: Openclipart2, Twe-
moji3, Noto Emoji4, EmojiTwo5, Fluent Emoji6,
and OpenMoji7. None of these web-curated sam-
ples are byte-identical to an SVG in the surveyed
benchmark corpora.
Tab. 7 reports the number of samples and license
for each source. All sources permit research use,
and each license was verified individually. Open-
Moji is distributed under CC-BY-SA-4.0 and there-
fore requires attribution upon redistribution. The
semantic decomposition and occlusion/amodal an-
notations are created by us and are not present in
any of the source datasets.
A.3
Benchmark Construction Process
Sample filtering
Following the criteria described
in the main text, we inspect each candidate’s ren-
2https://openclipart.org
3https://github.com/jdecked/twemoji
4https://github.com/googlefonts/noto-emoji
5https://github.com/EmojiTwo/emojitwo
6https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui-emoji
7https://github.com/hfg-gmuend/openmoji
Figure 5: Interface for Hierarchical Semantic Group
Annotation. Annotators inspect the rendered SVG,
highlight individual paths, and assign them to nodes in
a semantic decomposition tree.
dering and path organization. This visual inspec-
tion is necessary because object-level partitionabil-
ity cannot be determined from SVG markup alone:
in particular, a single path may span multiple se-
mantic objects. We remove such samples, as well
as indivisible compositions, compositions without
inter-object occlusion, and optimization-based vec-
torizations whose paths follow color regions rather
than object boundaries.
Annotators
The annotation was carried out by
two graduate students with an engineering back-
ground, who were compensated by our laboratory
for the hours spent on the task.
Annotation interface
A custom web interface
(Fig. 5) displays the rendered image alongside its
path list. Hovering over a path highlights its corre-
sponding region, and clicking assigns it to a seman-
tic group. Annotators use this interface to perform
the recursive decomposition described in the main
text. Each leaf record stores a free-text label (e.g.,
sun, beach, or sky) and the exact set of constituent
paths. For an occluded object, paths are assigned
according to the identity of the object they define
rather than to the foreground occluder, preserving
amodal grouping.
Annotation
guideline
Annotators
were
in-
structed to decompose each scene in a strict top-
down manner. Starting from the whole image, they
divided it into its largest semantically meaningful
components, and for each resulting node recur-
sively decided whether a further meaningful split
was possible, marking the node as a leaf when no
such split remained. The annotation was complete
only when every branch terminated in a leaf.
A node was split only when each resulting part
carries an independent semantic identity, judged
by viewing the part both in isolation and in the
context of the full image. A region qualifies when
it can be named as a concept in the scene even if


Table 6: Comparison with Existing SVG Benchmarks. We compare the domains, availability of semantic group
annotations, and evaluation metrics of existing SVG benchmarks.
Dataset
Domains
Group
Annotations
Metrics
Ours
icon / illustration / emoji
✓
MSE, DINO, Grouping quality, PERE
SVG-Bench
icon / font / emoji / diagram
✗
MSE, SSIM, LPIPS, DINO
MMSVG-Bench
icon / illustration / character
✗
MSE, SSIM, LPIPS, DINO
SArena
icon / illustration / chem / anime
✗
CLIP-I2I, SSIM, LPIPS, DINO
VectorGym
icon / font / emoji / diagram
✗
MSE, LPIPS, DINO, VLM-Judge
Table 7: Source data and licenses. Immediate collec-
tion points for the 203 SVGs in our benchmark, with
the number of samples and license of each source.
Stream
Source
#
License
SArena
SArena-Icon
41
research use
SArena-Illustration
23
SVG-Bench
SVG-Emoji (test)
29
research use
Web-curated
Openclipart
30
CC0-1.0
Twemoji
22
CC-BY-4.0
Noto Emoji
26
Apache-2.0
EmojiTwo
19
CC-BY-4.0
Fluent Emoji
9
MIT
OpenMoji
4
CC-BY-SA-4.0
Total
203
its shape alone is ambiguous; a plain blue rectan-
gle, for instance, is recognized as the sea once a
surfer is shown riding on it. Conversely, a part is
kept within its parent when it is meaningful only in
combination with the object it belongs to, as with
the limbs of a person or the strap of a hat. Under
the same criterion, an object such as a hat is sepa-
rated from the person wearing it, since it retains its
identity on its own. Elements without independent
semantic meaning, such as shadows and outlines,
were either absorbed into the group they belong to
or labeled none; nodes labeled none are excluded
from evaluation. Each group was assigned a free-
text label describing the entity it represents. Labels
were not drawn from a fixed vocabulary, since the
benchmark spans diverse visual domains. The full
guideline document is released together with the
benchmark.
Validation and release
After annotation, we
manually inspect each completed semantic tree
and its primitive assignments. We retain a sample
only when every drawable primitive is assigned to
exactly one leaf, such that the leaf primitive sets are
pairwise disjoint and jointly cover the complete set
of drawable primitives. This constraint concerns
primitive ownership; the rendered regions of dif-
ferent leaves may still overlap spatially because of
occlusion. Candidates for which no such assign-
ment can be constructed are excluded. In total, 203
SVGs pass filtering, annotation, and manual valida-
tion. Each released sample contains the raw SVG,
its decomposition tree, provenance information,
and license.
B
Implementation Details
B.1
Details on the Text-to-SVG Extension
Text-to-image model training.
For the Text-to-
SVG task, we adapt two general-purpose text-to-
image models, FLUX.1-dev (Black Forest Labs,
2024a) and SD3.5-medium (Esser et al., 2024), to
icon- and illustration-style raster generation, and
feed the generated raster into our pipeline. Both
models are trained on 32,000 images sampled from
MMSVG-Icon and MMSVG-Illustration (Yang
et al., 2025), rasterized at 1024 × 1024 on a white
background. Each caption is the dataset descrip-
tion prefixed with a trigger token <vector>, which
is also prepended at inference.
We attach rank-128 LoRA adapters (Hu et al.,
2022) to the attention and feed-forward projections
of every transformer block, keeping the text en-
coders, VAE, and all remaining layers frozen; this
yields 523.0M trainable parameters for FLUX.1-
dev and 188.0M for SD3.5-medium. Both mod-
els are trained at 1024 × 1024 with AdamW at a
learning rate of 10−4 and an effective batch size
of 64. Since FLUX.1-dev is guidance-distilled, it
is trained without classifier-free guidance (Ho and
Salimans, 2022), whereas SD3.5-medium drops
the caption with probability 0.1 so that its uncondi-
tional branch is adapted as well.
Checkpoint selection and inference.
We use
the checkpoint after one epoch for FLUX.1-dev
and two epochs for SD3.5-medium. At inference,
images are generated at 1024 × 1024 using the
default settings of each model card: 28 sampling


steps with guidance scale 3.5 for FLUX.1-dev, and
40 steps with CFG scale 4.5 for SD3.5-medium.
B.2
Evaluation Details
Common Representation and Rendering.
Fol-
lowing Sec. 4.1, G contains all labeled non-root
nodes obtained by flattening the GT semantic tree;
nodes labeled none are excluded. Each gi ∈G is
rendered from the drawable primitives in its sub-
tree. Drawable elements are indexed in SVG doc-
ument order over path, rect, circle, ellipse,
line, polyline, and polygon; elements inside
non-rendering definition containers are excluded.
All component images are rasterized with
CairoSVG 2.9.0 at 256×256, alpha-composited
onto an opaque white background, and scaled to
[0, 1]. Component-level scores are computed on
a crop derived from the union bounding box of
the non-white pixels in the two renderings. MSE
is averaged over all pixels and RGB channels.
For DINO, we use mean-pooled tokens from the
DINOv2-base model (Oquab et al., 2024) and re-
port the rescaled cosine similarity (1 + cos)/2.
Greedy Approximation of Optimal Grouping.
We approximate the subset optimization in Equa-
tion (1) using a two-phase greedy search. Exact
enumeration requires evaluating 2K subsets and is
intractable for SVGs containing hundreds or thou-
sands of generated paths. We denote the subset
returned for gi by ˜pi, distinguishing it from the
ideal optimizer p⋆
i in Equation (1).
For each gi, we retain as candidates only gen-
erated paths whose isolated non-white mask has
nonzero overlap with R(gi) at 256×256, imple-
mented as mask IoU > 10−9.
Starting from
the empty subset, we traverse these candidates in
SVG document order and retain a path if adding
it strictly improves the current objective. We then
perform at most ten rounds of alternating refine-
ment. In each round, all unselected candidates are
considered for addition, followed by all selected
candidates for removal; a change is accepted only
if it strictly improves the objective. The search ter-
minates when a complete round leaves the subset
unchanged.
After selecting ˜pi using MSE, we evaluate the
same subset with both MSE and DINO similarity.
Thus, DINO provides a complementary semantic
similarity score for the MSE-selected grouping
rather than inducing a separate path search. PERE
likewise uses this MSE-selected subset.
The term optimal grouping refers to the combi-
natorial target defined in Equation (1); the reported
results are greedy approximations rather than cer-
tified global optima. Moreover, the search is per-
formed independently for each gi. The resulting
subsets ˜pi may therefore overlap and are not con-
strained to form a global partition of the generated
SVG.
Predicted Grouping and Bidirectional Match-
ing.
In the predicted setting, we flatten the gener-
ated semantic hierarchy into the candidate groups
P defined in Sec. 4.1, retaining non-root groups
at every depth. For each metric, we construct the
complete |G| × |P| score matrix. Semantic Re-
call selects the best predicted group in each GT
row, whereas Semantic Precision selects the best
GT node in each predicted-group column. These
are independent nearest-neighbor matches rather
than a one-to-one assignment; hence, the same pre-
dicted group may match multiple GT nodes, and
the same GT node may match multiple predicted
groups. MSE and DINO construct and match their
score matrices independently.
Recall, Precision, and F1 are first computed
within each image. F1 is the harmonic mean of that
image’s Recall and Precision. The MSE version
is applied to the two errors and remains lower-is-
better, whereas the DINO version is applied to
the two similarities and remains higher-is-better.
Dataset-level results are then macro-averaged over
the 203 images. Consequently, the reported F1 is
not generally equal to the harmonic mean of the
dataset-level Recall and Precision values.
Post-Edit Rendering Error.
For PERE, we con-
struct occlusion cases from pairs of depth-1 GT
groups defined in Sec. 4.2, i.e., the root’s imme-
diate children, whose amodal masks overlap. To
determine the foreground object, we delete each
group from the GT SVG in turn and measure
the mean pixel change within the overlapping re-
gion relative to the complete GT rendering. The
group whose deletion produces the larger change
is treated as the foreground occluder o; ties are
resolved by GT node order.
Operationally, O is treated as a collection con-
taining one foreground occluder for each overlap-
ping pair. Thus, the same occluder may occur
multiple times when it overlaps multiple objects.
In the optimal setting, ˆo is the MSE-selected subset
˜pi constructed for the corresponding GT occluder
o. In the predicted setting, for PERE we restrict P


Table 8: Quantitative results on the Image-to-SVG
task with MMSVG-Bench. Evaluated on 300 sam-
ples with whole-image fidelity metrics, since MMSVG-
Bench provides no ground-truth semantic-group anno-
tations. The best results are highlighted in bold.
Whole Image
Methods
MSE↓
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
DINO↑
VTracer
.0021
.0357
.9650
.9934
OmniSVG
.0546
.2031
.8783
.9202
InternSVG
.0254
.1114
.8664
.9646
StarVector
.0592
.2502
.8857
.8604
LayerPeeler
.0660
.2212
.8345
.7846
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B
.0797
.3419
.8479
.9118
Gemini-3-flash
.0409
.1961
.8907
.9559
Ours
.0016
.0278
.9701
.9958
to the outermost labeled groups in the generated
SVG, and ˆo is the group with the lowest full-frame
MSE to o, as defined in Equation (4).
For each case, we remove the paths of o from
the GT SVG and those of ˆo from the generated
SVG. The two edited SVGs are rendered indepen-
dently at 256×256 on white, and their full-frame
MSE is computed without bounding-box cropping.
Every deletion starts from the original, unedited
SVG rather than accumulating previous deletions.
PERE is averaged first over the occlusion pairs
within each image and then over the benchmark
images. All 203 images contain at least one valid
pair, yielding 337 pairs in total.
Relation to Whole-Image Fidelity.
Whole-
image MSE and DINO are reported separately to
measure whether a method generated the target im-
age in the first place. Optimal grouping removes
the requirement for native grouping metadata but
remains sensitive to missing or incorrectly gener-
ated primitives. Likewise, PERE is not normalized
by the unedited whole-image error and therefore
measures end-to-end editability rather than group-
ing alone. For methods reported in both the optimal
and predicted settings, the underlying SVG is iden-
tical. Differences in Semantic Recall and PERE
therefore reflect the effect of using the model’s
predicted groups instead of GT-conditioned path
optimization.
C
Evaluation on Image-to-SVG with
MMSVG-Bench
To further validate that our performance is not
confined to our curated benchmark, we evaluate
the Image-to-SVG task on MMSVG-Bench (Yang
et al., 2025) against all baselines. Since MMSVG-
Bench provides no ground-truth semantic-group
annotations, grouping quality and editability can-
not be measured on it; we therefore report whole-
image fidelity only.
As shown in Tab. 8, our
method achieves the best scores across all four met-
rics. Notably, although our pipeline decomposes
the scene and reassembles it from per-component
vectorizations, it still attains the highest fidelity,
confirming that our strong performance extends to
a standard benchmark beyond our own.
D
More Qualitative Results
This section provides additional qualitative results
complementing the analyses in the main paper. All
figures follow the same format as their counterparts
in the main paper, showing more samples across
diverse scenes and prompts. Across various sce-
narios, we consistently visualize the full generated
image, the isolated semantic object, and the resid-
ual background to assess functional editability.
Figures 6 to 8 extend the Image-to-SVG compar-
ison in Fig. 3, and Fig. 9 extends the Text-to-SVG
comparison in Fig. 4. These additional results col-
lectively substantiate our pipeline’s structural supe-
riority: it robustly isolates distinct entities based on
semantic logic and seamlessly recovers obscured
background geometries via amodal inpainting, en-
suring high-quality structural completeness across
diverse visual domains.


E
Prompts for our tool-augmented framework
E.1
Region Decomposition Decision Prompt
See Figure 10 for an example prompt.
E.2
Residual Judge Prompt
See Figure 11 for an example prompt.
E.3
Inpainting Judge Prompt
See Figure 12 for an example prompt.
E.4
Polygon Prediction Prompt
See Figure 13 for an example prompt.
E.5
Polygon Prediction Prompt (Category-Aware)
See Figure 14 for an example prompt.
E.6
Polygon Prediction Prompt (Structured Reasoning)
See Figure 15 for an example prompt.
E.7
Polygon Prediction Prompt (Geometric Strict)
See Figure 16 for an example prompt.
E.8
Inpainting Selection Prompt
See Figure 17 for an example prompt.
E.9
Image-to-SVG Prompt for the VLM Baselines
See Figure 18 for an example prompt.
E.10
Text-to-SVG Prompt for the VLM Baselines
See Figure 19 for an example prompt.


GT
Ours (pred)
Qwen-3.6-35B
VTracer
OmniSVG
InternSVG
StarVector
LayerPeeler
Whole Image
Claw Hammer
Residual
Gemini-3-flash
Whole Image
Pencil
Residual
Whole Image
Straw
Residual
Whole Image
Book
Residual
Figure 6: Additional Qualitative Results on the Image-to-SVG Task (1/3). For each scenario, we show the
whole image, isolated semantic object, and residual background. The whole image in the GT column is also used
as the input image for all methods. Ours (pred) denotes the group (set of primitives) predicted by our model. For all
remaining generated outputs, we show the semantic object rendered from paths selected using an optimal post-hoc
grouping strategy. Our method effectively isolates discrete entities and recovers occluded background geometry
through high-quality amodal inpainting.


GT
Ours (pred)
Qwen-3.6-35B
VTracer
OmniSVG
InternSVG
StarVector
LayerPeeler
Gemini-3-flash
Whole Image
Snow Board
Residual
Whole Image
Egg
Residual
Whole Image
Sun
Residual
Whole Image
Pencil
Residual
Figure 7: Additional Qualitative Results on the Image-to-SVG Task (2/3). For each scenario, we show the
whole image, isolated semantic object, and residual background. The whole image in the GT column is also used
as the input image for all methods. Ours (pred) denotes the group (set of primitives) predicted by our model. For all
remaining generated outputs, we show the semantic object rendered from paths selected using an optimal post-hoc
grouping strategy. Our method effectively isolates discrete entities and recovers occluded background geometry
through high-quality amodal inpainting.


Whole Image
Cap
Residual
Whole Image
Bread
Residual
Whole Image
Hat
Residual
Whole Image
Laptop
Residual
GT
Ours (pred)
Qwen-3.6-35B
VTracer
OmniSVG
InternSVG
StarVector
LayerPeeler
Gemini-3-flash
Figure 8: Additional Qualitative Results on the Image-to-SVG Task (3/3). For each scenario, we show the
whole image, isolated semantic object, and residual background. The whole image in the GT column is also used
as the input image for all methods. Ours (pred) denotes the group (set of primitives) predicted by our model. For all
remaining generated outputs, we show the semantic object rendered from paths selected using an optimal post-hoc
grouping strategy. Our method effectively isolates discrete entities and recovers occluded background geometry
through high-quality amodal inpainting.


Ours (FLUX)
Qwen-3.6-35B
OmniSVG
InternSVG
Gemini-3-flash Ours (SD3.5)
Whole Image
Treasure chest
Residual
Whole Image
Person
Residual
Whole Image
Fish
Residual
Whole Image
Eggs
Residual
Figure 9: Additional Qualitative Results on the Text-to-SVG Task. Generated SVGs for the prompts “A small
island with a palm tree and treasure chest”, “A person reading a book under a tree”, “A fish jumping from water
into clouds”, and “A bird’s nest with two eggs and musical notes” (top to bottom). For each scenario, we show the
whole image, the isolated semantic object, and the residual background. OmniSVG and InternSVG produce no
semantic grouping, so their object and residual rows are empty.


Region Decomposition Decision Prompt
You decide whether to decompose a region of a flat-color illustration
into named sub-parts. {parent_context}
======================================================================
DECIDE: is_atomic = true | false
ATOMIC IS THE DEFAULT. The pipeline already paints the parent's mask;
only split when each child would be drawn on its OWN LAYER by a
human designer. Visual fragments sharing one fill are NOT separate
layers.
Choose ATOMIC unless ALL THREE hold:
1. The region contains 2+ semantically NAMED sub-parts (each can
carry a plain noun-phrase a designer would put on a layer).
2. EACH sub-part occupies >= 25% of the parent region's bbox area.
This is a HARD floor. Tiny decorations (logos, buttons,
stickers, individual pedals/seats/handles on a vehicle,
small accessories) are NOT separate parts -- they belong to
the parent's fill. If any candidate child would be < 25%
area, the whole split is wrong -> ATOMIC.
3. The sub-parts visibly OCCLUDE each other (one silhouette has a
notch cut by the other, so the inpaint merge needs separate
layers to reconstruct each).
DEPTH-2 GATE -- depth-2 is RARE.
When parent_label is non-empty you are at depth 2. ATOMIC is almost
always the right answer here -- the dataset has roughly 1 depth-2
case in 15. Only mark non-atomic if EVERY check above holds AND the
split is obvious to ANY designer reading the parent shape. Any
uncertainty -> ATOMIC.
Depth >= 3 is BLOCKED by code -- never attempt.
======================================================================
ALWAYS ATOMIC (no exceptions, at any depth):
- Single-fill natural shapes (sun, moon, cloud, fire, smoke, water,
leaf, flower, rainbow band, individual star, single mushroom,
single mountain, single tree).
- Tools / man-made objects (laptop, phone, hammer, bottle, lamp,
trophy, spray bottle, magnifying glass, target, lightbulb,
sunglasses, kettle, microphone, vase, basket, knife, bicycle).
Decorations on their surface (logo, label, sticker, screen
content, key rows, individual pedals/seats/handles) are part
of the tool's fill -- NEVER separate parts.
- ALL body parts including HEAD (head, face, hand, foot, eye, ear,
nose, mouth, hair, lip, neck). NEVER split a head into face
features. Characters / persons / animals are ATOMIC as a single
body -- do not split into head/body/legs.
- Repeated identical small shapes (spikes, gems, dots, stripes,
petals, rays, sparkles, buttons). Keep as one plural entry OR
omit entirely. Do not enumerate per instance.
- Pure stroke / outline / shading / highlight / shadow. Never split.
NEVER EMIT placeholder labels: "background", "none", "remainder",
"residual", "rest", "leftover", "other", "misc", "outline", "stroke",
"highlight", "shadow", "shading", "fill". The parent mask absorbs
unnamed pixels -- do not invent catch-alls.
======================================================================
Z-ORDER -- HARD RULE (inpaint merge depends on this).
List `components` BACK-to-FRONT (painter's order; index 0 deepest):
- Background / container goes FIRST. Foreground / overlay LAST.
- Occlusion decides: if A is partially hidden by B, A comes
before B. Whichever silhouette has a notch cut into it is BEHIND.
- Frame / outline around a fill goes FIRST.
- Container + contents: the container goes FIRST, contents LAST.
- Repeated instances side-by-side without overlap -- natural reading
order (left -> right) is fine.
======================================================================
LABEL + BBOX RULES:
- label = plain noun phrase. No parent tokens, no catch-all.
- _bbox = tight [ymin, xmin, ymax, xmax] in 0-1000 normalized
coords of the FULL ORIGINAL image.
- Sibling bboxes describe DISJOINT regions (may touch, must not
strongly overlap). EXCEPT container + contents at the same level
(jail + prisoner, sunglasses + face) -- overlap OK, z-order
disambiguates.
======================================================================
OUTPUT -- valid JSON only, no markdown:
{{


"is_atomic": <true|false>,
"components": [{{"label": "...", "_bbox": [ymin, xmin, ymax, xmax]}}, ...]
}}
======================================================================
EXAMPLES
[Root, scene with sun + two clouds (multi-entity, all atomic).]
{{
"is_atomic": false,
"components": [
{{"label": "sun",
"_bbox": [120, 700, 320, 920]}},
{{"label": "left cloud",
"_bbox": [400,
80, 600, 420]}},
{{"label": "right cloud", "_bbox": [380, 540, 580, 880]}}
]
}}
[Atomic, focus on "laptop" -- single tool.]
{{"is_atomic": true, "components": []}}
[Atomic, focus on "head" -- face / eyes / mouth / hair are NEVER separated.]
{{"is_atomic": true, "components": []}}
[Atomic, focus on any sub-region with parent_label non-empty --
default answer at depth 2 is ATOMIC.]
{{"is_atomic": true, "components": []}}
Figure 10: Region Decomposition Decision Prompt.
Residual Judge Prompt
You decide ONE thing about a vector-graphic layer.
INPUTS
- IMAGE 1: the full original scene (for context).
- IMAGE 2: a single layer labeled "{label}", cut out on white.
White pixels = transparent / not part of the layer.
PIXEL CONTEXT
- Visible pixels of THIS layer in IMAGE 2: {part_visible_px}
- Total color (non-white) pixels of the FULL scene in IMAGE 1: {scene_color_px}
- This layer covers about {ratio_pct:.2f}% of the scene's color area.
DECISION -- is_residual
Set TRUE only when IMAGE 2 is GARBAGE leftover that a designer
would never put on a layer:
- Scattered dots / noise pixels with no shape.
- Thin edge slivers / partial outlines tracing the boundary of
a sibling part.
- Broken fragments of a single shape already represented by
siblings.
Set FALSE -- this layer is REAL -- when IMAGE 2 is any coherent
shape, INCLUDING:
- A coherent large fill with CUTOUTS where foreground siblings
sit on top of it. This is the SCENE BACKGROUND
(sky / circular plate / sand ground / wall). The fact that
it has notches cut into it does NOT make it residual -- it
makes it the back layer of the painter's stack.
- A partially-occluded coherent sub-shape.
The phrase "leftover background partition with cutouts" describes a
REAL background layer, NOT residual. Background layers paint FIRST
and other parts paint on top of them; their characteristic look is
"big fill with foreground-shaped holes". Classify them as is_residual
= FALSE so the downstream stage-2 judge can decide z-order.
PRIORITY HINTS (apply BEFORE the qualitative judgement):
- If the layer covers >= 15% of the scene's color area, it is
almost certainly a real layer, not slivers. Default FALSE.
- If the layer is mostly thin lines / scattered dots covering
< 5% of the scene, it is almost certainly residual. Default TRUE.
Be CONSERVATIVE: when uncertain, FALSE (keep). Dropping a real layer
is irreversible; keeping a borderline layer just adds one more
sibling.
OUTPUT -- JSON only, no markdown:
{{"is_residual": true | false, "reason": "one short sentence naming the visible evidence"}}
Figure 11: Residual Judge Prompt.


Inpainting Judge Prompt
You decide up to FOUR things about a vector-graphic layer.
INPUTS
- IMAGE 1: the full original scene.
- IMAGE 2: a single layer labeled "{label}", cut out on white.
White pixels = transparent / not part of the layer. IMAGE 2 may be
incomplete because in IMAGE 1 some of this layer is hidden under
another part drawn on top of it.
PART PIXEL CONTEXT
- Visible pixels of THIS layer in IMAGE 2: {part_visible_px}
- Total color (non-white) pixels of the FULL scene in IMAGE 1: {scene_color_px}
- This layer covers about {ratio_pct:.2f}% of the scene's color area.
{sibling_block}{parent_block}
DECISION A -- is_residual
Set TRUE when IMAGE 2 is scatter / dot fragments / thin slivers /
leftover pixels with no coherent shape -- i.e. there is no single
named sub-part a designer would draw to produce this silhouette.
Set FALSE when IMAGE 2 forms a meaningful coherent sub-shape (even
if partially occluded).
DECISION B -- occluded (evaluate ONLY when is_residual=false)
Set TRUE when ALL of:
(a) IMAGE 1 shows clear visual evidence that this layer is occluded
by another scene element -- IMAGE 2's silhouette has a noticeable
chunk cut out by something drawn in front of it.
(b) The hidden region is non-trivial: rough rule, adding it would
need pixels comparable to >= 5% of the layer's currently visible
area. Thin antialiased edges and sub-pixel noise do NOT count.
Set FALSE otherwise (already complete / in-front of everything that
touches it / supposed occlusion is just edge noise).
Be CONSERVATIVE on occluded: prefer false unless the gap is clearly
visible. When is_residual=true, ALWAYS set occluded=false (we drop
the residual; we don't reconstruct it).
DECISION C -- occluding_siblings (evaluate ONLY when occluded=true)
Output a JSON array of SIBLING NAMES (the 'name' column of the table
above) for every sibling that paints OVER this layer. Closed set: only
those exact names are valid, NEVER invent new names and NEVER pick the
parent layer. Use the geometric prior:
- High `sib->tgt` with a visibly cut-out silhouette in IMAGE 1 =>
strong occluder candidate.
- High `iou` with symmetric coverage => probably a redundant pair,
not an occluder.
- `adj_px > 0` with `sib->tgt ~ 0` => they only touch, not occlude.
Order entries most-occluding first. Empty array `[]` is required when
occluded=false; it is also acceptable when occluded=true and you
cannot identify the occluder from the provided list (the prompt fails
open to FLUX in that case).
{decision_d_block}
OUTPUT -- JSON only, no markdown:
{"is_residual": true | false, "occluded": true | false, "occluding_siblings": [<sibling names>], "reason": "one short
sentence naming the visible evidence"{description_field}}
Figure 12: Inpainting Judge Prompt.


Polygon Prediction Prompt
You are given two images:
IMAGE 1: the full original scene.
IMAGE 2: a cropped layer showing ONLY the part labeled "{label}"
(white = transparent / not part of the layer). It is
INCOMPLETE because other scene elements occlude it.
Coordinates: 0..1000 normalized over IMAGE 1 (origin top-left).
Infer the complete true shape of "{label}" as it exists in IMAGE 1,
reasoning ONLY from the visible evidence in IMAGE 2 (visible contour
curvature, proportions, symmetry) together with where occluders hide it
in IMAGE 1. Make NO assumption about object category or any typical /
textbook shape -- derive the shape from what is actually shown. Output
ONE closed polygon of that complete shape that:
- passes through ALL visible pixels of "{label}",
- continues the visible contour smoothly where it is smooth and with
corners where it has corners,
- fills ONLY the genuinely occluded gaps, never exceeding a visible
natural endpoint or entering background.
Single closed boundary, 30-50 vertices, short segments on curves.
Output ONLY a JSON object (no markdown):
{{"polygon": [[x1,y1], [x2,y2], ..., [xN,yN]]}}
Figure 13: Polygon Prediction Prompt 1.
Polygon Prediction Prompt (Category-Aware)
You are given two images:
IMAGE 1: the full original scene.
IMAGE 2: a cropped layer showing ONLY the part labeled "{label}"
(white = transparent / not part of the layer). It is
INCOMPLETE because other scene elements occlude it.
Coordinates: 0..1000 normalized over IMAGE 1 (origin top-left).
Predict the full silhouette of "{label}" as a typical flat vector
illustration of that object would appear in IMAGE 1. Use BOTH:
(a) the visible part in IMAGE 2 -- its actual contour, proportions,
orientation, and where it is interrupted by an occluder,
(b) common knowledge of what a "{label}" looks like as a clean
illustration -- its overall outline and proportions.
Anchor the silhouette to the visible pixels (never deviate from them).
For occluded gaps, prefer the shape most consistent with (a) AND (b).
Never extend into background or past a visible natural endpoint.
Single closed boundary, 30-50 vertices, short segments on curves.
Output ONLY a JSON object (no markdown):
{{"polygon": [[x1,y1], [x2,y2], ..., [xN,yN]]}}
Figure 14: Polygon Prediction Prompt 2 (Category-Aware).


Polygon Prediction Prompt (Structured Reasoning)
You are given two images:
IMAGE 1: the full original scene.
IMAGE 2: a cropped layer showing ONLY the part labeled "{label}"
(white = transparent / not part of the layer). It is
INCOMPLETE because other scene elements occlude it.
Coordinates: 0..1000 normalized over IMAGE 1 (origin top-left).
Predict the complete outline of "{label}" as it exists in IMAGE 1,
including the parts hidden by occluders.
Reason in TWO steps before answering:
STEP 1 -- VISIBLE: identify the contour of "{label}" that is fully
visible in IMAGE 2. Note its curvature, corners, symmetry, and the
natural endpoints where the silhouette is interrupted by another
layer drawn on top.
STEP 2 -- OCCLUDED: locate the regions in IMAGE 1 where another
element covers "{label}". Estimate the most plausible continuation
of the silhouette into those regions, using contour smoothness,
symmetry, and proportional cues from STEP 1. Do not invent shape
beyond what the visible evidence supports.
Then output ONE closed polygon that:
- passes through ALL visible pixels of "{label}",
- continues smoothly into the occluded regions,
- never enters background pixels or extends past visible endpoints.
Single closed boundary, 30-50 vertices, short segments on curves.
Output ONLY a JSON object (no markdown):
{{"polygon": [[x1,y1], [x2,y2], ..., [xN,yN]]}}
Figure 15: Polygon Prediction Prompt 3 (Structured Reasoning).
Polygon Prediction Prompt (Geometric Strict)
You are given two images:
IMAGE 1: the full original scene.
IMAGE 2: a cropped layer showing the part labeled "{label}", cut out
on a white background. White = not part of the layer. The
layer is INCOMPLETE because other elements occlude it in
IMAGE 1.
Coordinates: 0..1000 normalized over IMAGE 1 (origin top-left).
Reconstruct the complete silhouette of "{label}" as a SINGLE closed
polygon. Rules:
- The polygon MUST enclose every visible pixel of "{label}" from
IMAGE 2 -- no visible pixel may fall outside the polygon.
- The polygon must NOT extend into regions of IMAGE 1 that are
clearly background (white / empty space) or that belong to layers
other than the occluders of "{label}".
- Closures across occluded gaps should be the simplest contour
consistent with the visible silhouette's curvature and endpoint
tangents.
- Place more vertices on curved regions, fewer on straight runs.
Single closed boundary, 30-50 vertices.
Output ONLY a JSON object (no markdown):
{{"polygon": [[x1,y1], [x2,y2], ..., [xN,yN]]}}
Figure 16: Polygon Prediction Prompt 4 (Geometric Strict).


Inpainting Selection Prompt
You are picking the best inpainting result for a vector-graphic part.
INPUTS
- IMAGE 1 = original scene. The part labeled "{label}" exists somewhere in
it but is partially OCCLUDED by other layers drawn on top.
- IMAGE 2 = the SAM cutout of the "{label}" layer on white. This is the
partial / visible portion of the part (the rest is hidden in the scene).
- IMAGES 3..N = candidate inpainting results (A, B, C, D, ...) that
attempted to reconstruct the FULL "{label}" by filling in the OCCLUDED
region. The visible region was preserved from IMAGE 2 in all of them,
so candidates differ ONLY in how they filled the occluded portion.
MOST IMPORTANT CRITERION (this dominates)
- Did the candidate COVER and DRAW the OCCLUDED region well? That is,
the part of "{label}" that was missing in IMAGE 2 must be recovered
as a sensible, complete shape that extends the visible silhouette
naturally and FILLS the gap. A candidate that leaves the occluded
region empty, broken, or only partially filled is worse than one
that fully and plausibly reconstructs it. Pick the candidate that
most COMPLETELY recovers the hidden portion of the "{label}".
Secondary criteria (only used to break ties between candidates that
already cover the occluded region equally well):
- It should not hallucinate unrelated objects/faces in the filled region.
- Color and edge style should roughly match the visible portion.
- It should not bleed far into regions that were obviously background.
OUTPUT -- JSON only, no markdown:
{{"best": "<A|B|C|D...>",
"reason": "one short sentence naming the visible evidence (focus on occluded coverage)"}}
Figure 17: Inpainting Selection Prompt.
Image-to-SVG Prompt for the General Purpose VLMs
You are converting a raster image into a semantically structured, editable SVG file, exactly as a professional vector
designer would author it.
Requirements:
1. Reproduce the image as faithfully as possible using flat-color vector paths.
2. Organize ALL paths into a semantic hierarchy of nested <g> tags. Every group must have a descriptive id (e.g. id="sun", id
="cloud", id="mountain").
3. Order elements back-to-front in painter's order: background objects first, foreground objects last.
4. Each object must be GEOMETRICALLY COMPLETE (amodal): draw its full shape even where it is occluded by objects in front of
it, so that removing or moving any foreground group leaves complete objects behind with no holes.
5. Use a viewBox that matches the image aspect ratio.
Output ONLY the final SVG code, nothing else.
Figure 18: Image-to-SVG Prompt for the General Purpose VLMs.
Text-to-SVG Prompt for the General Purpose VLMs
You are creating a semantically structured, editable SVG file from the following description, exactly as a professional
vector designer would author it.
Description: {text}
Requirements:
1. Depict the description as faithfully as possible using flat-color vector paths.
2. Organize ALL paths into a semantic hierarchy of nested <g> tags. Every group must have a descriptive id (e.g. id="sun", id
="cloud", id="mountain").
3. Order elements back-to-front in painter's order: background objects first, foreground objects last.
4. Each object must be GEOMETRICALLY COMPLETE (amodal): draw its full shape even where it is occluded by objects in front of
it, so that removing or moving any foreground group leaves complete objects behind with no holes.
5. Use a square viewBox.
Output ONLY the final SVG code, nothing else.
Figure 19: Text-to-SVG Prompt for the General Purpose VLMs.
