Title: Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05636v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 00:35:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild 

# YUXUAN HAN, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 

# XIN MING, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 

# TIANXIAO LI, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 

# ZHUOFAN SHEN, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 

# QIXUAN ZHANG, ShanghaiTech University and Deemos Technology Co., Ltd., China 

# LAN XU, ShanghaiTech University, China 

# FENG XU, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 

Fig. 1. Given a smartphone sequence captured in the wild (4 sampled views shown here), our method reconstructs high-quality facial assets, which can be exported to graphics engines like Blender for photo-realistic rendering. As shown in the close-up above, our method faithfully reconstructs facial detail patterns around the lip, eyebrow, and cheek. 

High-quality facial appearance capture has traditionally required costly studio recording. Recent works consider an in-the-wild smartphone-based setup; however, their model-based inverse rendering paradigm struggles with the complex disentanglement of reflectance from unknown illumina-tion. To bridge this gap, we propose to shift the paradigm into training a powerful delighting network as a prior to constrain the optimization. We leverage the OLAT dataset and the rendered Light Stage scans for train-ing, and propose Dataset Latent Modulation (DLM) to seamlessly integrate these heterogeneous data sources. Specifically, by conditioning the core network on learnable source-aware tokens, we decouple dataset-specific styles from physical delighting principles, enabling the emergence of a de-lighting prior that outperforms existing proprietary models. This powerful delighting prior enables a simple and automatic appearance capture pipeline that achieves high-quality reflectance estimation from casual video inputs, outperforming prior arts by a large margin. Furthermore, we leverage our 

Authors’ addresses: Yuxuan Han, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, hanyx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; Xin Ming, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 1729406968@qq.com; Tianxiao Li, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, tx-li23@mails.tsinghua. edu.cn; Zhuofan Shen, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, czf23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; Qixuan Zhang, ShanghaiTech University and Deemos Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China, zhangqx1@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Lan Xu, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China, xulan1@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Feng Xu, School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, xufeng2003@ gmail.com. 

appearance capture method to transform the multi-view NeRSemble dataset into NeRSemble-Scan, a large-scale collection of 4K-resolution relightable scans. By open-sourcing our model and the NeRSemble-Scan dataset, we democratize high-end facial capture and provide a new foundation for the research community to build photorealistic digital humans. CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Rendering .

1 INTRODUCTION 

Facial appearance capture lies at the core of digital human cre-ation, enabling applications across visual effects generation, inter-active entertainment, and immersive virtual experiences. Although production-level results have been achieved under delicately con-trolled lighting using specialized studio systems [Alexander et al .2013, 2009], such setups are costly and inaccessible to everyday users. In contrast, capturing facial appearance in the wild, i.e. , from casually recorded smartphone videos under unconstrained and un-known illumination, remains fundamentally challenging. The dif-ficulty stems from faithfully disentangling clean and relightable reflectance maps from complex real-world lighting effects. Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in facial appear-ance capture from unconstrained smartphone videos [Bharadwaj et al . 2023; Han et al . 2026; Xu et al . 2025]. Early works adopt a   

> arXiv:2605.05636v1 [cs.CV] 7 May 2026 46:2 •Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu

model-based inverse rendering framework [Bharadwaj et al . 2023; Xu et al . 2025], which is constrained by oversimplified lighting mod-els, struggling to resolve complex light transport inherent in most in-the-wild scenarios. To address this, a recent concurrent work, WildCap [Han et al . 2026], proposes a hybrid approach that performs model-based inverse rendering on top of delighted images predicted by a data-driven method, thereby improving reconstruction qual-ity in various lighting conditions. However, WildCap necessitates manual efforts to isolate regions where the delighted images exhibit artifacts, thereby hindering its scalability for large-scale applications. In addition, WildCap relies on a specialized region-based inverse rendering to clean these artifacts, which also increases system com-plexity and results in a discontinuous texture map. Crucially, we also observe that a strong delighting prior can effectively regular-ize model-based inverse rendering; by internalizing accurate light transport into the prior, it is possible to achieve intervention-free delighting and stable per-scene optimization. Driven by this insight, we shift the focus of in-the-wild facial appearance capture toward learning a robust delighting prior that effectively disentangles dif-fuse albedo from a single-view in-the-wild face image. However, training such a powerful delighting prior is non-trivial. On the one hand, state-of-the-art solutions remain proprietary in both training data and model weights [Futschik et al . 2023; Kim et al .2024; Yoon et al . 2024], which makes it challenging for the research community to reproduce or build upon their performance. While FaceOLAT [Rao et al . 2025], a recent open-source dataset captured by a Light Stage in the One-Light-At-a-Time (OLAT) mode [De-bevec et al . 2000], has attempted to bridge this gap, its utility for training a powerful delighting prior is compromised by spatial blur-ring stemming from imperfect OLAT frame alignment and the lack of physically correct diffuse albedo for supervision. On the other hand, even the leading proprietary model, SwitchLight [Kim et al .2024], struggles with complex lighting and leaves noticeable baking artifacts in predictions, which ultimately necessitate manual inter-ventions and specialized inverse rendering in WildCap [Han et al .2026]. In this paper, we propose OpenDelight, a powerful and open-source delighting prior for facial appearance capture in the wild. On the data front, to address the inherent quality limitations of FaceOLAT [Rao et al . 2025], we first collect a dataset captured by a Light Stage in the material mode [Ghosh et al . 2011], compris-ing relightable scans of 120 subjects. Our scan dataset and FaceO-LAT are highly complementary: scan-based renderings provide the necessary sharpness and physically correct diffuse albedo, while OLAT-integrated images contribute to closing the gap between syn-thetic and real-world images. However, training a delighting prior that seamlessly inherits the strengths of such heterogeneous data sources remains a challenging task. If handled naively, the network tends to settle for a compromised solution. To resolve this, our key insight is to decompose the knowledge within these heterogeneous datasets into shared mechanisms (the high-level foundation of delighting) and dataset-specific styles (color distributions, degree of physical correctness, and spatial sharpness). Building on this insight, we propose a Dataset Latent Modulation (DLM) technique, which employs learnable source-aware tokens as additional conditions to the network. Given that the parameter count of these tokens is negligible compared to the core network, simply end-to-end training encourages a natural emergence of dis-entanglement: the tokens absorb the styles of each dataset, while the core network distills the principles of facial delighting. At in-ference time, we steer the network toward sharp and physically correct predictions by conditioning it on the tokens associated with our scan dataset. Thanks to the meticulously constructed dataset and effective training techniques, our model achieves significantly better results than the leading proprietary model SwitchLight [Kim et al. 2024], while keeping the method simple. With the powerful delighting prior at hand, we further unlock its potential to empower facial appearance capture in the wild. Given smartphone-captured multi-view images, we utilize OpenDelight to estimate diffuse albedo across views, which are then fused into a unified texture. This clean texture base enables performing conven-tional model-based inverse rendering within a patch-level diffusion prior [Han et al . 2025, 2026] in a more stable way. Compared to WildCap, our method not only eliminates the need for manual in-tervention to correct network artifacts but also removes its complex and specialized inverse rendering process, while achieving on par or better quality, demonstrating that a superior delighting prior can fundamentally simplify the appearance capture problem. Finally, leveraging our automatic appearance capture method, we transform an existing multi-view face dataset, NeRSemble [Kirschstein et al . 2023], into a large-scale collection of 4K-resolution Light Stage scans, which we term NeRSemble-Scan. Remarkably, we demon-strate that OpenDelight, when retrained solely on NeRSemble-Scan and FaceOLAT, achieves comparable delighting performance to the model trained on our private Light Stage scan dataset and FaceOLAT. By open-sourcing our code and the NeRSemble-Scan dataset 1, we aim to lower the barriers to high-end facial capture, delighting, and relighting for the research community and everyday users. In conclusion, our contributions include: 

• A fully automatic facial appearance capture system that significantly narrows the quality gap between in-the-wild and controllable recordings. 

• A powerful delighting prior that outperforms leading propri-etary solutions, with a Dataset Latent Modulation technique for effective training on heterogeneous data sources. 

• An open-sourced, large-scale, 4K-resolution Light Stage scan dataset, that enables the community to perform high-quality facial appearance capture and portrait delighting. 

2 RELATED WORKS 2.1 Facial Appearance Capture 

With the goal of cloning real-world faces into the digital world, facial appearance capture has attracted much attention in recent years [Klehm et al . 2015]. Early works consider a high-end setup. They build professional apparatus [Debevec et al . 2000; Ghosh et al .2011; Gotardo et al . 2018; Lattas et al . 2022; Ma et al . 2007; Riviere et al . 2020; Weyrich et al . 2006; Xu et al . 2022; Zhang et al . 2022] in studios for on-site data capture and pursue production-level re-sults [Alexander et al . 2013, 2009]. However, these methods are   

> 1https://yxuhan.github.io/OpenDelight/index.html Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild •46:3

limited to a few professional users. In recent years, with the ad-vancement of differentiable rendering and data-driven priors, many works have proposed to democratize this technique for low-cost usage. A group of works [Dib et al . 2021, 2024; Galanakis et al . 2025; Huang et al . 2024b; Lattas et al . 2020, 2023, 2021; Paraperas Papan-toniou et al . 2023; Rao et al . 2024, 2025; Ren et al . 2024; Smith et al .2020] reconstruct a relightable scan from a single face image by training on a large-scale dataset captured by the high-end method. Although user-friendly, the single-view nature hinders these works from achieving production-level quality. Other works consider a multi-view setup [Azinović et al . 2023; Bharadwaj et al . 2023; Han et al . 2024, 2026; Li et al . 2024; Rainer et al . 2023; Wang et al . 2023; Xu et al . 2025; Zheng et al . 2023]. Despite promising results being achieved by assuming a controllable capture environment via the smartphone flashlight [Azinović et al . 2023; Han et al . 2025, 2024] or the sunlight [Wang et al . 2023], high-quality appearance capture from in-the-wild smartphone video still remains underexplored. In this direction, model-based inverse rendering methods [Bharadwaj et al . 2023; Xu et al . 2025] are limited to their oversimplified phys-ical model and unstable optimization process due to the ill-posed nature. To address this, the concurrent work, WildCap [Han et al .2026], proposes a hybrid method that performs model-based inverse rendering on top of delighted images predicted by a data-driven method. Although it demonstrates improved results, it requires man-ual efforts to isolate regions where data-driven predictions exhibit artifacts, thus hindering its scalability for large-scale applications In this paper, our key insight is to shift the focus of in-the-wild facial appearance capture toward learning a robust delighting prior. We demonstrate that with a powerful delighting prior at hand, the appearance capture problem becomes much simpler. As a fully au-tomatic method, we obtain on par or better results compared to the concurrent work with manual intervention, i.e. , WildCap. 

2.2 Portrait Delighting Network 

Given an in-the-wild face image, previous works [Kim et al . 2024; Pandey et al . 2021; Wang et al . 2020; Weir et al . 2022; Yeh et al . 2022] train a neural network to predict the diffuse albedo image from it. Another very relevant task is portrait shadow editing [Futschik et al .2023; Ponglertnapakorn et al . 2023, 2025; Yoon et al . 2024; Zhang et al . 2020], where a network is trained to soften or strengthen the shadow. This portrait delighting and shadow editing network has numerous applications, including image-based relighting [Pandey et al . 2021; Wang et al . 2020; Yeh et al . 2022] and enhancing other face-perceiving tasks [Weir et al . 2022; Yoon et al . 2024], such as face parsing. The main challenge in this field is the closed-source ecosys-tem. As the training data is captured by a Light Stage [Debevec et al .2000; Ghosh et al . 2011] or other controllable environments [Gross et al . 2010], which are typically expensive, state-of-the-art solutions remain proprietary in both data and model weights. While some recent concurrent works [Chen et al . 2025; Rao et al . 2025] have attempted to bridge this gap by releasing their OLAT dataset, there are no existing open-source delighting methods that achieve a com-parable performance to the proprietary model. In this paper, we propose to learn a powerful delighting network to enhance facial ap-pearance capture. However, unlike the generic methods mentioned above, our delighting network concentrates exclusively on the facial skin region. By leveraging our Dataset Latent Modulation technique for joint training on the OLAT and the rendered scan dataset, we produce delighting results with negligible lighting residuals that the leading proprietary model ( i.e. , SwitchLight [Kim et al . 2024]) cannot achieve. Our code and the training data will also be open-sourced to foster future research. 

2.3 Training Across Face Datasets 

Existing face datasets are heterogeneous, including large-scale single-view datasets, e.g. , FFHQ [Karras et al . 2019], large-scale rendered datasets, e.g. , Cafca [Buehler et al . 2024], and small multi-view studio-captured datasets, e.g. , NeRSemble [Kirschstein et al . 2023]. Recent works attempt to train over multiple datasets to inherit generaliza-tion ability and quality from different data sources. Early methods adopt a pretrain-then-finetune strategy [Han et al . 2023; Yoon et al .2024]. However, this inevitably leads to catastrophic forgetting and requires a complex multi-stage training regime. More recently, some concurrent works [Kirschstein et al . 2025; Xu et al . 2026] propose si-multaneously training on heterogeneous data sources via a learnable latent code to help unified learning. Despite these works sharing the same spirit as our method at the abstract technical level, the motivation is quite different. Concurrent works focus on avatar learning, where they use a learnable latent code to enforce a shared latent space with the same color style [Xu et al . 2026] or improving 3D-awareness [Kirschstein et al . 2025]. Differently, our goal is to train a delighting network where we adopt source-aware tokens to disentangle dataset-specific style from the foundation of delighting mechanism. In addition, our data sources have a larger domain gap in terms of realism, where we train on a synthetic rendered scan dataset and an OLAT dataset, while concurrent works use different real-face datasets for training. 

3 OVERVIEW 

Our method takes a casual smartphone video captured in uncon-strained environments as input. From this source, we aim to recon-struct high-quality and relightable facial assets, comprising a base mesh and a set of reflectance maps, including diffuse albedo, specu-lar albedo, and normal. However, directly solving for these assets via model-based inverse rendering is notoriously ill-posed [Bharad-waj et al . 2023; Xu et al . 2025], and often suffers from unstable optimization and baked-in shadows in results. To address this, our key observation is that a powerful data-driven delighting prior can be synergistically integrated with optimization-based frameworks to effectively constrain the inverse rendering process. Following this insight, we first introduce a powerful de-lighting prior, OpenDelight, in Section 4, which estimates the diffuse albedo from a single face image. We then propose an automatic fa-cial appearance capture pipeline in Section 5. In Section 6, we apply our appearance capture method to transfer NeRSemble [Kirschstein et al . 2023] into an open-source Light Stage scan dataset to foster future research. 46:4 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu   

> Fig. 2. The OLAT dataset and the rendered Light Stage scan dataset are complementary data sources for delighting network training. We show (a) a diffuse albedo image (OLAT rendered with uniform lighting) and (b) a relit image from the FaceOLAT dataset [Rao et al .2025], followed by (c) a diffuse albedo image and a relit image from our rendered scan dataset. The rendered scan dataset provides more physically correct diffuse albedo and a relit image with sharper details, while the OLAT dataset has a smaller domain gap relative to real-world images.

4 LEARNING A DELIGHTING PRIOR 

Our goal is to develop a powerful delighting prior tailored for the facial appearance capture task. To this end, we first construct a large-scale dataset of training pairs in Section 4.1, consisting of face images and their corresponding diffuse albedo images. Then, we train a neural network in Section 4.2 to learn the mapping from images with complex lighting effects to their diffuse albedo. 

4.1 Dataset 

We leverage two highly complementary data sources for training, 

i.e. , an OLAT dataset and a synthetic dataset rendered from Light Stage scans, which corresponds to the two capture modes of the Light Stage [Debevec et al . 2000; Ghosh et al . 2011]. Below, we first detail the OLAT dataset in Section 4.1.1 and the Light Stage scan dataset in Section 4.1.2. Then, we introduce our data engine to convert these datasets into the training format in Section 4.1.3. 

4.1.1 OLAT Dataset. We utilize FaceOLAT [Rao et al . 2025], which is the largest publicly available portrait OLAT dataset to date. It con-sists of 139 subjects, each captured from 40 viewpoints under 331 in-dividual lighting directions; see more details in their paper [Rao et al .2025]. We successfully processed 134 subjects. We use 124 for train-ing and 10 for evaluation. By leveraging these OLAT data, we can synthesize photo-realistic face images under arbitrary novel illumi-nations via linear combination. Following previous works [Pandey et al . 2021; Wang et al . 2020], we approximate the diffuse albedo as images rendered with uniform lighting. However, training solely on this dataset is insufficient due to its inherent quality issue, as illustrated in Figure 2. Firstly, since the OLAT images exhibit subtle misalignments that optical flow cannot fully resolve, the integrated results tend to be blurred. Secondly, because FaceOLAT does not provide polarized captures, treating uniform lighting as diffuse albedo leads to specular baking arti-facts, particularly at grazing angles. In addition, we observe that the 

> Fig. 3. Example training pairs generated from our mixing datasets.

trained neural network will inevitably inherit these dataset-specific artifacts, resulting in suboptimal performance. To circumvent these limitations, we incorporate a synthetic dataset rendered from Light Stage scans for joint training, as it provides high-quality and physically correct supervision signals. 

4.1.2 Light Stage Scan Dataset. We purchased 120 Light Stage scans from an online store, each with 4K-resolution diffuse albedo, specu-lar albedo, and normal map. The dataset contains 15 Asians (7 males and 8 females), 23 African Americans (12 males and 11 females), and 82 Caucasians (40 males and 42 females). Compared to the FaceOLAT dataset, this dataset provides sharper rendered images and more physically correct diffuse albedo, as shown in Figure 2. However, as it is rendered via a graphics engine, this dataset has a wider domain gap relative to real-world images compared to the OLAT dataset. 

4.1.3 Data Engine. To synthesize image-albedo pairs for training, we curate a High Dynamic Range Imaging (HDRI) environment map dataset from PolyHaven, consisting of 473 maps. We use 373 maps for training and 100 for evaluation. We further classify the HDRIs according to their frequency [Sun et al . 2020] and increase the sampling ratio of high-frequency lighting to render more chal-lenging training data; this leads to slightly better delighting results compared to uniformly sampling. We adopt random rotation aug-mentation to the HDRIs before rendering. For the FaceOLAT dataset, we utilize the official scripts to render images under the sampled HDRI lighting, producing approximately 20K image-albedo pairs. For the Light Stage scan dataset, we render 20K image-albedo pairs using Blender. To fill the completeness gap, previous works typically collect a large-scale 3D assets library including various clothes and hairstyles, so that the rendered scans are as complete as the real face im-ages [Saleh et al . 2025; Yoon et al . 2024]. However, since our model is tailored for facial appearance capture, such labourious asset creation is unnecessary. Instead, we generate skin masks for both datasets and learn a delighting prior over only the skin region. Following the standard protocol in facial analysis [Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2017; Zheng et al . 2022], we apply a landmark-based alignment to all the images. See Figure 3 for an example of training pairs from both datasets. We denote the image, diffuse albedo, and skin mask as 𝐼 ∗, 𝐴 ∗, 𝑀 ∗, respectively. Here, ∗ can be 𝑜 or 𝑟 , indicating whether it is from the OLAT dataset or the rendered dataset. Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:5 Add Source -Aware Tokens 𝑑 𝑖  

> 𝑟
> Add Source -Aware Tokens 𝑑 𝑖
> 𝑜

ViT  Encoder  Conv. Decoder 

Drop Out 

Drop Out 

Loss 

> (L1 & LPIPS)

Input  Prediction  Ground Truth   

> Fig. 4. Architecture and training pipeline of our base delighting network 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 . To address the challenge of training on heterogeneous data sources, we propose a Dataset Latent Modulation technique, where we input additional source-aware tokens into the ViT encoder. These tokens encourage a natural emergence of disentanglement: the tokens absorb the styles of each dataset, while the core network distills the essential principles of facial delighting.

To foster reproducibility, our data engine will be made publicly available, including the HDRI dataset and the rendering pipeline. 

4.2 Network 

Given the OLAT dataset and the rendered dataset, our goal is to train a network over these complementary sources to enable generalizable and high-quality delighting. Following recent advancements [Khirodkar et al . 2024], we em-ploy a Vision Transformer (ViT)-based encoder 𝐸 [Dosovitskiy et al .2021] coupled with a lightweight convolutional decoder 𝐷 as the base delighting network 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 . We initialize the ViT encoder with Masked Autoencoder (MAE) pre-trained weights [He et al . 2021] while the convolutional head is randomly initialized. To train 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 , a straightforward strategy is to pre-train it on the OLAT dataset and subsequently fine-tune it on the rendered dataset. However, we observe that the network loses its robust-ness to real images due to catastrophic forgetting. Alternatively, we can jointly train 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 on both datasets. While this mitigates forgetting, it introduces instability: during inference, the network unpredictably switches between the distribution of OLAT and the rendered scan, as shown in Figure 10. This leads to multi-view in-consistency and hinders downstream facial appearance capture. To resolve these limitations, we propose the Dataset Latent Modulation (DLM) technique. 

4.2.1 Dataset Latent Modulation. Our key insight is to disentangle the knowledge within these disparate datasets into shared mecha-nisms (the high-level foundation of delighting) and dataset-specific styles (color distributions, degree of physical correctness, and spa-tial sharpness). In this way, we can explicitly control the style of predictions at inference time to ensure view-consistency. Specifically, as shown in Figure 4, we optimize a set of source-aware tokens {𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖

}𝐾 𝑖 =1 during training; similarly, ∗ can be 𝑜 or 𝑟 ,corresponding to the OLAT dataset and the rendered dataset. Given a face image 𝐼 ∗ as input, we first tokenize the masked version of it to obtain a series of image tokens {𝑓 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1:

[𝑓 1, 𝑓 2, ..., 𝑓 𝑁 ] = Tokenize (𝐼 ∗ · 𝑀 ∗) (1) We then append the source-aware tokens into the image token list and input it to the ViT encoder 𝐸 to obtain a list of encoded tokens: 

[ ˜𝑓 1, ˜𝑓 2, ..., ˜𝑓 𝑁 | ˜𝑑 ∗

> 1

, ˜𝑑 ∗

> 2

, ..., ˜𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝐾

] = 𝐸 ([ 𝑓 1, 𝑓 2, ..., 𝑓 𝑁 |𝑑 ∗

> 1

, 𝑑 ∗

> 2

, ..., 𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝐾

]) (2) Since the dataset-specific style has already injected into the image tokens, we drop out { ˜𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖

}𝐾 𝑖 =1 and send the encoded image tokens 

{ ˜𝑓 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1 into the convolutional decoder 𝐷 to produce the predicted diffuse albedo image ˆ𝐴 ∗:

˜𝑓 = Unpatchify ([ ˜𝑓 1, ˜𝑓 2, ..., ˜𝑓 𝑁 ]) (3) 

ˆ𝐴 ∗ = 𝐷 ( ˜𝑓 ) (4) During training, we randomly sample pairs from the OLAT dataset or the rendered dataset. We apply a combination of L1 loss and LPIPS loss [Zhang et al . 2018a] between ˆ𝐴 ∗ and its ground truth 𝐴 ∗.As the parameter count of these source-aware tokens is negligible compared to the core network, simply end-to-end training encour-ages a natural emergence of disentanglement: the tokens absorb the styles of each dataset, while the core network distills the essential principles of facial delighting. At inference time, given an in-the-wild image 𝐼 𝑟𝑎𝑤 , we first apply a landmark-based alignment and mask out its non-skin region to obtain 𝐼 . We then send 𝐼 and the source-aware tokens of the rendered dataset, i.e. , {𝑑 𝑟 𝑖 }𝐾 𝑖 =1, to the delighting network 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 to produce the predicted diffuse albedo ˆ𝐴 :

ˆ𝐴 = 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 (𝐼, {𝑑 𝑟 𝑖 }𝐾 𝑖 =1) (5) This way, we steer the network toward sharp and physically correct predictions while inheriting strong generalization ability from the OLAT training dataset. 46:6 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu 

4.2.2 Detail Enhancement. Despite strong delighting performance, we observe that the absence of skip connections in our ViT-based architecture leads to a loss of fine-grained details. To address this, we introduce a UNet-based detail enhancement network 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 .Specifically, 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 takes the concatenation of the original image 

𝐼 and the predicted diffuse albedo ˆ𝐴 as inputs, producing a refined output ˆ𝐴 𝑑 with enhanced details: 

ˆ𝐴 𝑑 = 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 (𝐼, ˆ𝐴 ) (6) We train 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 solely on the rendered dataset. During training, we apply stochastic degradations to the ground truth albedo 𝐴 𝑟 , such as Gaussian noise and Gaussian blur, to generate the degraded version 

𝐴 𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑔 . We then train 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 to recover 𝐴 𝑟 from 𝐴 𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑔 and 𝐼 , using the L1 loss and LPIPS loss for supervision. This detail enhancement strategy is also proposed to refine the predictions of conditional Diffusion Models [Liu et al . 2025; Yoon et al . 2024]. Inspired by its success, here we adapt this approach to enhance our ViT-based architecture. 

5 PRIOR-GROUNDED RECONSTRUCTION 

With the powerful delighting prior at hand, we now demonstrate how it empowers facial appearance capture in the wild. In the fol-lowing, we first introduce how we capture and process the data in Section 5.1. Then, we detail our inverse rendering pipeline inte-grated with the delighting prior in Section 5.2. 

5.1 Data Capture and Processing 

As illustrated in Figure 1, our input consists of a casual smartphone video captured by moving around the subject. The entire capture process spans around 30 seconds, during which non-professional subjects are capable of maintaining a stable pose. Following WildCap [Han et al . 2026], we resize the frames to a resolution of 960 ×720. We then perform camera calibration via COLMAP [Schönberger and Frahm 2016; Schönberger et al . 2016] and reconstruct a mesh 𝐺 with ICT topology [Li et al . 2020] us-ing 2DGS [Huang et al . 2024a] and Wrap3D [Faceform 2025]. We next sample 𝑉 = 16 frames {𝐼 𝑖 𝑟𝑎𝑤 }𝑉 𝑖 =1 according to sharpness for reflectance optimization. Please refer to WildCap for more details. 

5.2 Optimization 

Our reflectance optimization framework is largely built upon the pipeline established by WildCap [Han et al. 2026] and DoRA [Han et al . 2025]. Specifically, we first apply OpenDelight to predict the diffuse albedo for each view. We denote the prediction as {𝐼 𝑖 }𝑉 𝑖 =1.Then, we build a texture map 𝐼 𝑈 𝑉 at 1K-resolution from {𝐼 𝑖 }𝑉 𝑖 =1

using the geometry 𝐺 and camera parameters. In WildCap, a manual mask is required to specify baking artifacts in 𝐼 𝑈 𝑉 , and subsequently, these artifacts are explained into local dark lights via a complex optimization process within a patch-level diffusion prior [Han et al . 2025]. However, we empirically find that the texture map 𝐼 𝑈 𝑉 obtained by our OpenDelight contains negligi-ble baking artifacts, even in complex scenes with high-frequency lighting. Thus, our optimization becomes much easier: we only opti-mize a global Spherical Harmonics (SH) lighting [Ramamoorthi and Hanrahan 2001] along with sampling the patch-level diffusion prior. Namely, our optimization is identical to the w/o Texel Grid Lighting 

baseline in WildCap. After sampling all the reflectance maps at 1K-resolution, we adopt a super-resolution (SR) network [Zhang et al .2018b] to upsample the maps to 4K; this SR network is trained on paired 1K and 4K Light Stage scan patches. Please refer to WildCap for more details. 

6 THE NERSEMBLE-SCAN DATASET 

We leverage our facial appearance capture method to transform the NeRSemble [Kirschstein et al . 2023] multi-view face dataset into Light Stage scans. Specifically, we select 170 subjects without face accessories from the original NeRSemble dataset, including 34 Asians (26 males and 8 females), 130 Caucasians (87 males and 43 females), and 6 people with dark skin (4 males and 2 females) For each subject, we select one frame with a neutral expression and use the provided 16 multi-view images to run our appearance capture method. We refer to this processed dataset as NeRSemble-Scan, which will be made publicly available. Next, we train our delighting network over the NeRSemble-Scan and the FaceOLAT dataset. We denote this version as OpenDelight*. As demonstrated in experiments, despite being a fully open-source model, OpenDelight* still achieves superior performance compared to the leading proprietary model SwitchLight. 

7 EXPERIMENTS 

In this section, we first introduce implementation details in Sec-tion 7.1. Then, we evaluate our delighting network (Section 7.2) and the appearance capture method (Section 7.3). Lastly, we discuss the limitations and future works in Section 7.4. We strongly suggest the reader check our supplementary material for more results. 

7.1 Implementation Details 

7.1.1 Delighting Prior Training. We adopt the ViT-Base architecture for the encoder 𝐸 in our base delighting network 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 . We train the network at a resolution of 512 × 512 . The training takes 1.5 days on two 48GB NVIDIA L20 graphics cards with a total batch size of 8. The learning rate for the ViT encoder 𝐸 and the convolutional decoder 𝐷 are set to 1𝑒 − 5 and 1𝑒 − 4, respectively. We set 𝐾 = 4

source-aware tokens. We train the detail enhancement network 

𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 at a resolution of 768 × 768 . The training takes 0.5 days on two 24GB NVIDIA RTX4090 graphics cards with a total batch size of 8. The learning rate is set to 1𝑒 − 4. At inference time, before sending 

ˆ𝐴 into 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 , we first interpolate it to 768 × 768 resolution. To ensure reproducibility, all the code will be made publicly available. 

7.1.2 Prior-Grounded Reconstruction. We adopt the same patch-level diffusion prior and the reflectance super-resolution network as WildCap [Han et al . 2026]. The sampling schedule and Other hyperparameters are kept identical to WildCap. This stage takes 20 minutes for data capture and processing and 8 minutes for appear-ance capture on a single 24GB NVIDIA RTX4090 graphics card. We thank the author of WildCap for sharing their code. 

7.1.3 Test Dataset and Metrics. We conduct quantitative experi-ments on the FaceOLAT test set and the rendered scans from an unseen Light Stage dataset, i.e. , 3DRFE [Stratou et al . 2012]. The Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:7 

Fig. 5. Comparison to prior arts in terms of diffuse albedo prediction on the FaceOLAT (the first two rows) and 3DRFE dataset (the last two rows). Table 1. Quantitative comparison to prior arts in terms of diffuse albedo prediction on the FaceOLAT and 3DRFE dataset.                                            

> Methods FaceOLAT 3DRFE PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> IC-Light 30.78 0.9671 0.1573 31.17 0.9568 0.1282 DreamLight 27.72 0.9747 0.1847 28.84 0.9627 0.2055 SwitchLight 32.98 0.9800 0.1031 31.08 0.9744 0.1032 OpenDelight 32.88 0.9817 0.0952 34.27 0.9803 0.0649 OpenDelight* 31.93 0.9809 0.1072 35.02 0.9812 0.0606

FaceOLAT test set comprises 10 subjects, while the 3DRFE dataset contains 23 subjects. We render 20 images for each subject in the FaceOLAT test set, while 10 images for the 3DRFE dataset. When rendering images, we keep the HDRIs sampled from the evaluation set to ensure the test lightings are unseen during training. To avoid quantitative evaluation being affected by global color scale ambiguities inherent in different face datasets, we estimate a color transform to align the predictions with the ground truth dif-fuse albedo before computing metrics. This color transform includes a channel-wise scale and bias, with a total of 6 parameters, and is es-timated on a per-method (including ours and all baselines to ensure fairness), per-image basis 2. We report Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM), and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) metrics over the facial region indicated by the skin mask. 

> 2This color transform is only applied to quantitative results; all qualitative comparisons use the unaligned predictions to show the actual model output.

7.2 Evaluation on Delighting Prior 

In the following, we first compare our method to prior arts in Sec-tion 7.2.1. We then evaluate several key design choices, including the importance of training on mixing datasets (Section 7.2.2), the strategy for mixing training (Section 7.2.3), and the effectiveness of our detail enhancement network (Section 7.2.4). 

7.2.1 Comparisons. 

Baselines. We extensively compare our method against Switch-Light [Kim et al . 2024], a leading proprietary model for diffuse albedo prediction. We do not compare other existing methods, such as Pandey et al . [2021] and Yeh et al . [2022], as they are neither publicly accessible nor perform better than SwitchLight. For the sake of completeness, we also compare methods working on rele-vant tasks. Firstly, we include state-of-the-art open-source portrait harmonization models, i.e. , IC-Light [Zhang et al . 2025] and Dream-Light [Liu et al . 2025], for a comparison. Secondly, we compare to GPSR [Yoon et al . 2024], a leading proprietary model for portrait shadow removal. As all the baselines are trained on complete face images, we run them on the complete face image and then compare their results on the facial skin region with our method. In addition, we include the open-sourced version of our method, OpenDelight*, for comparison, to locate its performance grade. 

Comparison with SwitchLight. SwitchLight [Kim et al . 2024] is a proprietary model trained on a large-scale OLAT dataset. We first compare our method to it on our test set. As shown in Table 1 and Figure 5, our method demonstrates superior performance on both 46:8 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu 

> Fig. 6. Comparison to SwitchLight on in-the-wild face images sampled from the FFHQ dataset in terms of diffuse albedo prediction.

test sets. We further conduct qualitative comparisons on in-the-wild subjects sampled from the FFHQ dataset [Karras et al . 2019]. As shown in Figure 6, SwitchLight tends to bake lighting effects, particularly in facial regions with hard shadow. Both OpenDelight and OpenDelight* produce significantly better delighting results than SwitchLight, resulting in a cleaner diffuse albedo. We believe the performance gain mostly arises from our training data. In our pilot study, we trained our network on a simplified dataset, where we only adopted low-frequency HDRIs for rendering training pairs. In this case, we observe noticeable baking artifacts similar to those seen in SwitchLight. We emphasize that the open-source nature of our method enables the research community to better study the working mechanism of the delighting network. 

Comparison with IC-Light and DreamLight. IC-Light [Zhang et al .2025] and DreamLight [Liu et al . 2025] are trained to modify the light-ing effects of the portrait image to match the provided background image and/or text prompt. We adapt IC-Light and DreamLight to the diffuse albedo prediction task by providing a uniform white back-ground image to them. We have also tried other background images, but find they work best under a uniform white background. As demonstrated in Table 1 and Figure 5, these methods produce infe-rior diffuse albedo predictions because the network is ambiguous in inferring the lighting effects on the face given only the background image. By training specifically on diffuse albedo prediction, our method internalizes the delighting mechanism in network weights and thus achieves better results. 

Comparison with GPSR. GPSR [Yoon et al . 2024] is a proprietary model trained on a mixture of an OLAT dataset and a synthetic dataset for portrait shadow removal. Since GPSR is not publicly 

> Fig. 7. Comparison to a portrait shadow removal method, GPSR.

accessible, we conducted a qualitative comparison by running our method on the example images provided in their paper. As illustrated in Figure 7, both our method and GPSR can effectively remove com-plex hard shadows. Notably, our framework is simpler than GPSR. While GPSR requires a complex multi-stage training pipeline, our Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:9     

> Fig. 8. Ablation study on mixing dataset training in terms of diffuse albedo prediction. We compare a baseline variant Ours-o , which is trained solely on the FaceOLAT dataset.
> Fig. 9. Ablation study on mixing dataset training and mixing training strat-egy in terms of diffuse albedo prediction. We compare two baseline variants:
> Ours-r (trained solely on the rendered scan dataset) and Finetune (pretrained on the OLAT dataset and finetuned on the rendered scan dataset).

method only requires a single-stage training thanks to the proposed Dataset Latent Modulation technique. In addition, our inference is substantially more efficient, requiring only 2 forward passes (ViT and UNet) compared to the 50 sampling steps typically required by GPSR’s Diffusion Model. 

> Fig. 10. Ablation study of the Dataset Latent Modulation (DLM) technique on diffuse albedo prediction. Without DLM, the network unpredictably switches between the distribution of the FaceOLAT dataset and the rendered scan dataset at inference time, leading to severe view inconsistency.

7.2.2 Importance of Mixing Dataset Training. To evaluate the impor-tance of training on the mixing dataset, we introduce two baselines: 

i) Ours-o , where we train the network solely on the FaceOLAT dataset, and ii) , Ours-r , where we train the network solely on the rendered scan dataset. To train these two baselines, we remove the source-aware tokens and keep other implementations identical to our full method. In addition, the detail enhancement network 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 

in Ours-o is trained on the FaceOLAT dataset. We first compare the baseline trained solely on the FaceOLAT dataset. As shown in Figure 8, Ours-o inherits the dataset-specific issues of the FaceOLAT dataset illustrated in Figure 2, including spatial blurring and physically incorrect diffuse albedo with specular highlights baking. Our method effectively resolves these issues by combining a rendered Light Stage scan dataset for mix training, resulting in more physically correct and sharper results. We then compare the baseline trained solely on the rendered scan dataset. As shown in Figure 9, Ours-r sometimes predicts wrong skin tone (the first row) or dirty diffuse albedo (the second row). That is primarily due to the domain gap between the rendered scan and the real-world images. By training synergistically with the FaceOLAT dataset, our method achieves significantly better results with plausible skin tone and clean diffuse albedo. 

7.2.3 Design Choices in Mixing Training Strategy. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed Dataset Latent Modulation technique for training on mixing datasets, we conduct two baselines: i) Fine-tune , where we pretrain the network on the FaceOLAT dataset and finetune it on the rendered scan dataset, and ii) , Ours w/o DLM ,where we remove the source-aware tokens in our full method. We first compare to the Finetune baseline. As shown in Figure 9, the Finetune baseline (c) achieves better results than training solely on the rendered scan dataset (b), since it inherits robustness from pretraining on the FaceOLAT dataset. However, one limitation of 

Finetune is catastrophic forgetting. This causes the Finetune baseline 46:10 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu    

> Fig. 11. Comparison to existing facial appearance capture methods in terms of diffuse albedo reconstruction.
> Fig. 12. Ablation study of the detail enhancement network in diffuse albedo prediction. We compare to a baseline variant Ours w/o DE , where we directly use the results of 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 .

to produce results with compromised quality. By simultaneously training on both datasets, our method avoids forgetting, produces a cleaner and flatter diffuse albedo (d), especially in regions indicated by the red arrow. We then compare to the Ours w/o DLM baseline in Figure 10. Without the proposed Dataset Latent Modulation technique, Ours w/o DLM unpredictably switches between the distribution of two training datasets at inference time, leading to severe view incon-sistency. Our method effectively resolves this issue by explicitly disentangling the dataset-specific style from the fundamental de-lighting mechanisms. This way, we ensure view-consistent inference by explicitly indicating the style via the source-aware tokens. 

7.2.4 Importance of Detail Enhancement Network. To evaluate the importance of the detail enhancement network 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 , we compare to a baseline variant Ours w/o DE where we directly use the results of 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 . As shown in Figure 12, the results from the base delighting network 𝐹 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 lack fine-grained details, primarily due to the absence of skip connections in the ViT-based architecture. By learning a UNet-based enhancer 𝐹 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 , we can effectively restore details from the input image, leading to higher-quality results. 

7.3 Evaluation on Appearance Capture 

In the following, we first compare our method to prior arts in Sec-tion 7.3.1. We then evaluate the reconstruction fidelity of our method by comparing the re-rendered image against the real image in Sec-tion 7.3.2. Lastly, we present more results of our method on diverse ethnic groups in Section 7.3.3. 

7.3.1 Comparisons. 

Baselines. We first compare existing appearance capture methods that take the same input as our method. We include optimization-based methods, i.e. , FLARE [Bharadwaj et al . 2023] and DeFace [Huang et al . 2024b], and a state-of-the-art concurrent work, i.e. , Wild-Cap [Han et al . 2026], for comparison. To evaluate the importance of our delighting prior, we conduct a baseline variant, SwitchLight+ ,where we replace our OpenDelight with SwitchLight [Kim et al .2024] while keeping other implementations unchanged. In addition, we compare to the open-sourced variant, Ours* , where we replace OpenDelight with OpenDelight* in our pipeline. We do not compare to Xu et al . [2025] as their method is closed-source. Beyond involving baselines in the same setup as ours, we compare to DoRA [Han et al .Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:11 

> Fig. 13. Comparison to WildCap on diffuse albedo reconstruction. We show the reconstruction in the first row and close-ups in the second row.

2025], a method that takes a co-located smartphone and flashlight sequence as input. 

Comparison with FLARE and DeFace. FLARE [Bharadwaj et al .2023] and DeFace [Huang et al . 2024b] are model-based inverse rendering methods that aim to disentangle geometry, reflectance, and lighting from the observed images. To run their methods, we directly input the captured images {𝐼 𝑖 𝑟𝑎𝑤 }𝑉 𝑖 =1 to FLARE while send-ing a selected frontal view image to DeFace. As shown in Figure 11, FLARE and DeFace can remove specular highlights to some extent but struggle with hard shadows, which leads to dirty diffuse albedo with baking artifacts. That is because these model-based methods typically apply an oversimplified physical model, and the disen-tanglement is inherently ill-posed. By internalizing complex light transport into a learned delighting prior, our method demonstrates significantly better results. 

Comparison with SwitchLight+ and WildCap. Both SwitchLight+ 

and WildCap [Han et al . 2026] apply a data-driven delighting net-work, SwitchLight, to remove most lighting effects in the image, and then adopt a model-based inverse rendering pipeline to solve other reflectance maps. As shown in Figure 11, SwitchLight+ produces better results than model-based methods such as DeFace and FLARE. However, its results still have artifacts such as shadow baking. That is because SwitchLight struggles to remove hard shadows as we demonstrate in Figure 5 and Figure 6. To address this, the concurrent work, WildCap, proposes first manually locating these artifacts and then adopting a specialized optimization-based method to explain the baking artifacts as local dark lighting effects. With manual inter-vention , WildCap demonstrates comparable delighting results to our 

fully automatic method. However, their region-based optimization leads to discontinuous artifacts as illustrated in Figure 13. We em-phasize that with a powerful delighting prior, we can fundamentally simplify the facial appearance capture problem to a large extent. 

Comparisons with DoRA. DoRA [Han et al . 2025] is a state-of-the-art method for facial appearance capture in controllable en-vironments. To compare with it, we capture an extra co-located smartphone and flashlight video for the same subject. We feed the in-the-wild video to our method and the co-located video to DoRA. 

> Fig. 14. Comparison to DoRA on diffuse albedo reconstruction. We show an example captured image for both methods in (a) and (b), and results in (c), (d), and (e).
> Fig. 15. Evaluation on reconstruction fidelity of our facial appearance cap-ture system. We show the re-rendered image and the real image in the first and second row, respectively.

As shown in Figure 14, our method demonstrates comparable or better quality to DoRA while significantly reducing capture cost. In addition, our method can better preserve person-specific facial traits such as nevus. That is because our pipeline is built on top of WildCap [Han et al . 2026], which introduces an LPIPS loss term into the appearance capture process, while DoRA only adopts an L2 loss. As geometry reconstruction and camera calibration are not perfectly accurate especially in our low-cost setup, using an L2 loss tends to average out facial details. 

7.3.2 Evaluation on Reconstruction Fidelity. We evaluate the re-construction fidelity of our method by comparing the re-rendered images with real-captured ones. To this end, we capture two se-quences of the same subject: one in the wild and one in a controlled setup similar to DoRA [Han et al . 2025]. We apply our method to the in-the-wild sequence and align the resulting geometry to the con-trolled setup for re-rendering under co-located lighting. As shown in Figure 15, the re-rendered image looks close to the real image, demonstrating the high reconstruction fidelity of our method. Re-garding the quantitative metric, our method achieves an average LPIPS of 0.0576 compared to the real image. For context, the state-of-the-art method, DoRA [Han et al . 2025], achieves an LPIPS of 46:12 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu 

Fig. 16. Facial appearance capture results of our method on subjects from diverse ethnic groups captured under complex in-the-wild environments. Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:13 

Fig. 17. Limitations of our delighting network on processing colored nevus. We show the input image and its close-up in (a) and (b), and the predicted diffuse albedo and its close-up in (c) and (d). 

0.0499 using geometry reconstructed directly from the controlled sequence. Despite the increased difficulty of evaluating in-the-wild geometry against a separate controlled reference (whereas DoRA uses setup-specific reconstruction), our results remain highly com-petitive with DoRA. In addition, this experiment also demonstrates the correctness of the reconstructed albedo of our method. Since the re-rendered results under a novel lighting setup closely match the ground-truth photograph, it provides empirical evidence that our estimated albedo does not bake in environment-specific lighting. 

7.3.3 More Results. We test our method on subjects from diverse ethnic groups in Figure 16, where we show an example input image, the reconstructed reflectance maps rendered in screen space, and a relighting result. As illustrated in Figure 16, both our method and the open-sourced version demonstrate plausible reflectance estimation results that largely close the quality gap between high-end setups. In addition, due to the difference in training data, the skin tone in the raw predictions of OpenDelight and OpenDelight* are also different, as shown in Figure 6. Thanks to our prior-grounded optimization, the skin tone of Ours and Ours* are calibrated and become consistent. Please see our supplementary video for a better illustration. 

7.4 Discussions 

Potential Identity Loss. While our method achieves high-quality results, we observe potential identity loss arising from both the delighting and appearance capture processes. Regarding the delight-ing process, since the training set of our delighting network has limited identities, we observe that our method sometimes tends to explain colored nevus as lighting effects and remove them from the diffuse albedo map, as shown in Figure 17. To address this, a possible solution is to train a relighting network together with the delighting network; this way, we can train on a large-scale single-view face dataset such as FFHQ [Karras et al . 2019] and enforce a self-supervised reconstruction loss similar to Yeh et al . [2022]. Regarding the appearance capture process, we also observe that the re-rendered 3D facial assets in Figure 16 do not completely match the photograph. This discrepancy mainly arises from geometric inaccuracies in the WildCap system (Section 5.1), particularly in template registration and full-head completion. 

Skin Tone Bias. Due to the unbalanced nature in the training dataset for both the delighting network and the diffusion prior (Section 4.1 and 6), we observe our method is more biased towards lighter skin tones; see the results on the African American subject in Figure 16. We believe that collecting a more balanced dataset across diverse ethnic groups will be a valuable practical contribution. 

Efficiency. Our current method takes about 30 minutes from the smartphone video to the relightable 3D assets. Following recent trends [Ming et al . 2026; Wang et al . 2025], learning a feed-forward network to directly map sampled frames to the relightable 3D facial assets is an interesting future work. 

8 CONCLUSION 

We propose a fully automatic system for capturing facial appear-ance from smartphone video recorded in the wild. Considering that directly applying model-based inverse rendering is ill-posed and fragile to optimize, our key insight is to shift the focus of appear-ance capture to learning a powerful delighting prior. Specifically, on the data front, we leverage two complementary datasets, an OLAT dataset and a rendered Light Stage scan dataset. To enable effective and efficient mix training, we propose a Dataset Latent Modulation technique where we distill the essential delighting mechanisms into the core network while using source-aware tokens to absorb other dataset-specific bias. With simple network architecture and loss functions, we demonstrate superior delighting results to a leading proprietary method, SwitchLight. We further demonstrate that our powerful delighting prior can significantly simplify the appearance capture process. Our automatic method achieves significantly better results than previous works, while comparable to a concurrent work that requires manual intervention. Lastly, we leverage our method to transform the multi-view NeRSemble dataset into a large-scale collection of 4K-resolution relightable scans, which will be released with our code to foster future research on appearance capture and portrait delighting. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by the NSFC (No.62561160115). This work was also supported by THUIBCS, Tsinghua University, and BLBCI, Beijing Municipal Education Commission. Feng Xu is the corre-sponding author. 

REFERENCES        

> Oleg Alexander, Graham Fyffe, Jay Busch, Xueming Yu, Ryosuke Ichikari, Andrew Jones, Paul Debevec, Jorge Jimenez, Etienne Danvoye, Bernardo Antionazzi, et al .2013. Digital ira: Creating a real-time photoreal digital actor. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2013 Posters . 1–1. Oleg Alexander, Mike Rogers, William Lambeth, Matt Chiang, and Paul Debevec. 2009. The digital emily project: photoreal facial modeling and animation. In Acm siggraph 2009 courses . 1–15. Dejan Azinović, Olivier Maury, Christophe Hery, Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. 2023. High-res facial appearance capture from polarized smartphone images. In
> Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .16836–16846. Shrisha Bharadwaj, Yufeng Zheng, Otmar Hilliges, Michael J. Black, and Victoria Fernandez-Abrevaya. 2023. FLARE: Fast Learning of Animatable and Relightable Mesh Avatars. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42 (2023), 1 – 15. https: //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264490493 Marcel C. Buehler, Gengyan Li, Erroll Wood, Leonhard Helminger, Xu Chen, Tanmay Shah, Daoye Wang, Stephan Garbin, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Otmar Hilliges, Dmitry Lagun, Jérémy Riviere, Paulo Gotardo, Thabo Beeler, Abhimitra Meka, and Kri-pasindhu Sarkar. 2024. Cafca: High-quality Novel View Synthesis of Expressive Faces from Casual Few-shot Captures. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Paper . doi:10.1145/3680528.3687580

46:14 • Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu 

Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. 2017. How far are we from solving the 2D & 3D Face Alignment problem? (and a dataset of 230,000 3D facial landmarks). In 

International Conference on Computer Vision .Zhuo Chen, Chengqun Yang, Zhuo Su, Zheng Lv, Jingnan Gao, Xiaoyuan Zhang, Xi-aokang Yang, and Yichao Yan. 2025. POLAR: A Portrait OLAT Dataset and Generative Framework for Illumination-Aware Face Modeling. https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:283896525 Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and Mark Sagar. 2000. Acquiring the reflectance field of a human face. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . 145–156. Abdallah Dib, Gaurav Bharaj, Junghyun Ahn, Cédric Thébault, Philippe Gosselin, Marco Romeo, and Louis Chevallier. 2021. Practical face reconstruction via differentiable ray tracing. In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol. 40. Wiley Online Library, 153–164. Abdallah Dib, Luiz Gustavo Hafemann, Emeline Got, Trevor Anderson, Amin Fadaeine-jad, Rafael M. O. Cruz, and Marc-André Carbonneau. 2024. MoSAR: Monocular Semi-Supervised Model for Avatar Reconstruction using Differentiable Shading. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 1770–1780. Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2021. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. ICLR (2021). Faceform. 2025. Wrap 3D 2025.9: Industry-Leading Topology Transfer Tool for Digital Character Creation. https://faceform.com/ A topology transfer tool for converting 3D scans into consistent topologies, supporting use cases including VFX digital doubles, virtual try-on, micro detail transfer, and machine learning training data preparation. David Futschik, Kelvin Ritland, James Vecore, Sean Fanello, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Brian Curless, Daniel S `ykora, and Rohit Pandey. 2023. Controllable light diffusion for portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8412–8421. Stathis Galanakis, Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2025. FitDiff: Robust monocular 3D facial shape and reflectance estimation using Diffusion Models. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) . IEEE, 992–1004. Abhijeet Ghosh, Graham Fyffe, Borom Tunwattanapong, Jay Busch, Xueming Yu, and Paul Debevec. 2011. Multiview face capture using polarized spherical gradient illumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 30, 6 (2011), 1–10. Paulo Gotardo, Jérémy Riviere, Derek Bradley, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Thabo Beeler. 2018. Practical dynamic facial appearance modeling and acquisition. ACM Transactions on Graphics (2018). Ralph Gross, Iain Matthews, Jeffrey Cohn, Takeo Kanade, and Simon Baker. 2010. Multi-pie. Image and vision computing 28, 5 (2010), 807–813. Yuxuan Han, Junfeng Lyu, Kuan Sheng, Minghao Que, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu. 2025. Facial Appearance Capture at Home with Patch-Level Reflectance Prior. In SIGGRAPH .Yuxuan Han, Junfeng Lyu, and Feng Xu. 2024. High-Quality Facial Geometry and Appearance Capture at Home. In CVPR .Yuxuan Han, Xin Ming, Tianxiao Li, Zhuofan Shen, Qixuan Zhang, Lan Xu, and Feng Xu. 2026. WildCap: Facial Albedo Capture in the Wild via Hybrid Inverse Rendering. In CVPR .Yuxuan Han, Zhibo Wang, and Feng Xu. 2023. Learning a 3D Morphable Face Re-flectance Model From Low-Cost Data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8598–8608. Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Doll’ar, and Ross B. Girshick. 2021. Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021), 15979–15988. https: //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:243985980 Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2024a. 2D Gaussian Splatting for Geometrically Accurate Radiance Fields. In SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers . Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3641519. 3657428 Tianxin Huang, Zhenyu Zhang, Ying Tai, and Gim Hee Lee. 2024b. Learning to Decouple the Lights for 3D Face Texture Modeling. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. 2019. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 4401–4410. Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and Shunsuke Saito. 2024. Sapiens: Foundation for Human Vision Models. ECCV (2024). Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo. 2024. Switchlight: Co-design of physics-driven architecture and pre-training framework for human portrait relighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 25096–25106. Tobias Kirschstein, Simon Giebenhain, and Matthias Nießner. 2025. FlexAvatar: Learning Complete 3D Head Avatars with Partial Supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15599 (2025). Tobias Kirschstein, Shenhan Qian, Simon Giebenhain, Tim Walter, and Matthias Nießner. 2023. NeRSemble: Multi-View Radiance Field Reconstruction of Human Heads. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4, Article 161 (jul 2023), 14 pages. doi:10.1145/3592455 Oliver Klehm, Fabrice Rousselle, Marios Papas, Derek Bradley, Christophe Hery, Bernd Bickel, Wojciech Jarosz, and Thabo Beeler. 2015. Recent advances in facial appear-ance capture. In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol. 34. Wiley Online Library, 709–733. Alexandros Lattas, Yiming Lin, Jayanth Kannan, Ekin Ozturk, Luca Filipi, Giuseppe Clau-dio Guarnera, Gaurav Chawla, and Abhijeet Ghosh. 2022. Practical and scalable desktop-based high-quality facial capture. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 522–537. Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Vasileios Triantafyllou, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2020. AvatarMe: Realistically Renderable 3D Facial Reconstruction" in-the-wild". In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 760–769. Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Stylianos Ploumpis, Baris Gecer, Jiankang Deng, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2023. FitMe: Deep Photorealistic 3D Morphable Model Avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8629–8640. Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Stylianos Ploumpis, Baris Gecer, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Stefanos P Zafeiriou. 2021. AvatarMe++: Facial Shape and BRDF In-ference with Photorealistic Rendering-Aware GANs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2021). Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito. 2024. URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers .Ruilong Li, Karl Bladin, Yajie Zhao, Chinmay Chinara, Owen Ingraham, Pengda Xiang, Xinglei Ren, Pratusha Prasad, Bipin Kishore, Jun Xing, et al . 2020. Learning formation of physically-based face attributes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 3410–3419. Yong Liu, Wenpeng Xiao, Qianqian Wang, Junlin Chen, Shiyin Wang, Yitong Wang, Xinglong Wu, and Yansong Tang. 2025. DreamLight: Towards Harmonious and Consistent Image Relighting. NIPS (2025). Wan-Chun Ma, Tim Hawkins, Pieter Peers, Charles-Felix Chabert, Malte Weiss, Paul E Debevec, et al . 2007. Rapid Acquisition of Specular and Diffuse Normal Maps from Polarized Spherical Gradient Illumination. Rendering Techniques 2007, 9 (2007), 10. Xin Ming, Yuxuan Han, Tianyu Huang, and Feng Xu. 2026. VGGTFace: Topologically Consistent Facial Geometry Reconstruction in the Wild. AAAI (2026). Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Chloe Legendre, Christian Haene, Sofien Bouaziz, Christoph Rhemann, Paul E Debevec, and Sean Ryan Fanello. 2021. Total relighting: learning to relight portraits for background replacement. ACM Trans. Graph. 40, 4 (2021), 43–1. Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou, Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2023. Relightify: Relightable 3D Faces from a Single Image via Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .Puntawat Ponglertnapakorn, Nontawat Tritrong, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. 2023. DiFaReli: Diffusion Face Relighting. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .Puntawat Ponglertnapakorn, Nontawat Tritrong, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. 2025. DiFaReli++: Diffusion Face Relighting with Consistent Cast Shadows. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2025). Gilles Rainer, Lewis Bridgeman, and Abhijeet Ghosh. 2023. Neural shading fields for efficient facial inverse rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol. 42. Wiley Online Library, e14943. Ravi Ramamoorthi and Pat Hanrahan. 2001. An efficient representation for irradiance environment maps. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . 497–500. Pramod Rao, Gereon Fox, Abhimitra Meka, Mallikarjun B R, Fangneng Zhan, Tim Weyrich, Bernd Bickel, Hans-Peter Seidel, Hanspeter Pfister, Wojciech Matusik, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt. 2024. Lite2Relight: 3D-aware Single Image Portrait Relighting. ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Proceedings (2024). Pramod Rao, Abhimitra Meka, Xilong Zhou, Gereon Fox, Mallikarjun B R, Fangneng Zhan, Tim Weyrich, Bernd Bickel, Hanspeter Pfister, Wojciech Matusik, Thabo Beeler, Mohamed Elgharib, Marc Habermann, and Christian Theobalt. 2025. 3DPR: Single Image 3D Portrait Relighting with Generative Priors. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2025 Conference Proceedings (2025). Xingyu Ren, Jiankang Deng, Yuhao Cheng, Jia Guo, Chao Ma, Yichao Yan, Wenhan Zhu, and Xiaokang Yang. 2024. Monocular identity-conditioned facial reflectance reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 885–895. Jérémy Riviere, Paulo Gotardo, Derek Bradley, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Thabo Beeler. 2020. Single-shot high-quality facial geometry and skin appearance capture. ACM Transactions on Graphics (2020). Learning a Delighting Prior for Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild • 46:15 

Fatemeh Saleh, Sadegh Aliakbarian, Charlie Hewitt, Lohit Petikam, Xiao-Xian, Antonio Criminisi, Thomas J. Cashman, and Tadas Baltrušaitis. 2025. DAViD: Data-efficient and Accurate Vision Models from Synthetic Data. ICCV .Johannes Lutz Schönberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. 2016. Structure-from-Motion Revisited. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Johannes Lutz Schönberger, Enliang Zheng, Marc Pollefeys, and Jan-Michael Frahm. 2016. Pixelwise View Selection for Unstructured Multi-View Stereo. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) .William AP Smith, Alassane Seck, Hannah Dee, Bernard Tiddeman, Joshua B Tenen-baum, and Bernhard Egger. 2020. A morphable face albedo model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 5011–5020. Giota Stratou, Abhijeet Ghosh, Paul E. Debevec, and Louis philippe Morency. 2012. Exploring the effect of illumination on automatic expression recognition using the ICT-3DRFE database. Image Vis. Comput. 30 (2012), 728–737. https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11456690 Tiancheng Sun, Zexiang Xu, Xiuming Zhang, Sean Fanello, Christoph Rhemann, Paul Debevec, Yun-Ta Tsai, Jonathan T Barron, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. 2020. Light stage super-resolution: continuous high-frequency relighting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39, 6 (2020), 1–12. Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotný. 2025. VGGT: Visual Geometry Grounded Transformer. 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2025), 5294–5306. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:277043968 Yifan Wang, Aleksander Holynski, Xiuming Zhang, and Xuaner Zhang. 2023. Sunstage: Portrait reconstruction and relighting using the sun as a light stage. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 20792–20802. Zhibo Wang, Xin Yu, Ming Lu, Quan Wang, Chen Qian, and Feng Xu. 2020. Single image portrait relighting via explicit multiple reflectance channel modeling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 39, 6 (2020), 1–13. Joshua Weir, Junhong Zhao, Andrew Chalmers, and Taehyun Rhee. 2022. Deep Portrait Delighting. In European Conference on Computer Vision . https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:247618666 Tim Weyrich, Wojciech Matusik, Hanspeter Pfister, Bernd Bickel, Craig Donner, Chien Tu, Janet McAndless, Jinho Lee, Addy Ngan, Henrik Wann Jensen, et al . 2006. Analysis of human faces using a measurement-based skin reflectance model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 25, 3 (2006), 1013–1024. Yingyan Xu, Kate Gadola, Prashanth Chandran, Sebastian Weiss, Markus Gross, Gaspard Zoss, and Derek Bradley. 2025. Monocular Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild. 

ICCV (2025). Yingyan Xu, Pramod Rao, Sebastian Weiss, Gaspard Zoss, Markus Gross, Christian Theobalt, Marc Habermann, and Derek Bradley. 2026. RelightAnyone: A Generalized Relightable 3D Gaussian Head Model. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 284532282 Yingyan Xu, Jérémy Riviere, Gaspard Zoss, Prashanth Chandran, Derek Bradley, and Paulo F. U. Gotardo. 2022. Improved Lighting Models for Facial Appearance Capture. In Eurographics . https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251437674 Yu-Ying Yeh, Koki Nagano, Sameh Khamis, Jan Kautz, Ming-Yu Liu, and Ting-Chun Wang. 2022. Learning to Relight Portrait Images via a Virtual Light Stage and Synthetic-to-Real Adaptation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) (2022). Jae Shin Yoon, Zhixin Shu, Mengwei Ren, Cecilia Zhang, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Kr-ishna Kumar Singh, and He Zhang. 2024. Generative portrait shadow removal. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 43, 6 (2024), 1–13. Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2025. Scaling In-the-Wild Training for Diffusion-based Illumination Harmonization and Editing by Imposing Consistent Light Transport. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions . https://openreview.net/forum?id=u1cQYxRI1H Longwen Zhang, Chuxiao Zeng, Qixuan Zhang, Hongyang Lin, Ruixiang Cao, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. 2022. Video-Driven Neural Physically-Based Facial Asset for Production. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41 (2022), 1 – 16. https: //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246823692 Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. 2018a. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. In CVPR .Xuaner Zhang, Jonathan T. Barron, Yun-Ta Tsai, Rohit Pandey, Xiuming Zhang, Ren Ng, and David E. Jacobs. 2020. Portrait Shadow Manipulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39, 4. Yulun Zhang, Kunpeng Li, Kai Li, Lichen Wang, Bineng Zhong, and Yun Fu. 2018b. Image Super-Resolution Using Very Deep Residual Channel Attention Networks. In 

ECCV .Mingwu Zheng, Haiyu Zhang, Hongyu Yang, and Di Huang. 2023. NeuFace: Realistic 3D Neural Face Rendering from Multi-view Images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 16868–16877. Yinglin Zheng, Hao Yang, Ting Zhang, Jianmin Bao, Dongdong Chen, Yangyu Huang, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen, Ming Zeng, and Fang Wen. 2022. General facial representation learning in a visual-linguistic manner. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 18697–18709.