Title: AniGen: Unified $S^3$ Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08746v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:15:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation 

# YI-HUA HUANG ∗, The University of Hong Kong, China 

# ZI-XIN ZHOU, VAST, China 

# YUTING HE, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China 

# CHIRUI CHANG, The University of Hong Kong, China 

# CHENG-FENG PU, Tsinghua University, China 

# ZIYI YANG, The University of Hong Kong, China 

# YUAN-CHEN GUO, VAST, China 

# YAN-PEI CAO †, VAST, China 

# XIAOJUAN QI †, The University of Hong Kong, China 

Fig. 1. Given a single conditional image as input, AniGen generates a 3D shape along with its skeleton and skinning weights, supporting a wide range of 3D assets, including organic entities such as animals, cartoon characters, humans, and articulated man-made objects. 

Animatable 3D assets, defined as geometry equipped with an articulated skeleton and skinning weights, are fundamental to interactive graphics, embodied agents, and animation production. While recent 3D generative models can synthesize visually plausible shapes from images, the results are typically static. Obtaining usable rigs via post-hoc auto-rigging is brittle 

> ∗

This work is in collaboration with VAST. 

> †

Corresponding Author 

and often produces skeletons that are topologically inconsistent with the generated geometry. We present AniGen , a unified framework that directly generates animate-ready 3D assets conditioned on a single image. Our key insight is to represent shape, skeleton, and skinning as mutually consistent 

𝑆 3 Fields (Shape, Skeleton, Skin) defined over a shared spatial domain. To enable the robust learning of these fields, we introduce two technical inno-vations: (i) a confidence-decaying skeleton field that explicitly handles the geometric ambiguity of bone prediction at Voronoi boundaries, and (ii) a dual        

> arXiv:2604.08746v1 [cs.GR] 9 Apr 2026 2•Yi-Hua Huang, et al.
> skin feature field that decouples skinning weights from specific joint counts, allowing a fixed-architecture network to predict rigs of arbitrary complexity. Built upon a two-stage flow-matching pipeline, AniGen first synthesizes a sparse structural scaffold and then generates dense geometry and articula-tion in a structured latent space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
> AniGen substantially outperforms state-of-the-art sequential baselines in rig validity and animation quality, generalizing effectively to in-the-wild images across diverse categories including animals, humanoids, and machinery.
> Homepage: https://yihua7.github.io/AniGen-web/

1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of generative 3D models [Chen et al . 2025b; Li et al . 2025c; Wu et al . 2024a; Xiang et al . 2025b; Zhang et al . 2023, 2024b] has begun to democratize 3D content creation, enabling the synthesis of visually stunning geometry and appearance from simple text or image prompts. However, a significant gap remains between visual plausibility and functional utility. In interactive domains such as video games, virtual reality, and embodied AI, a 3D asset’s utility depends on its animatability . That is, it must be equipped with an articulated skeleton and precise skinning weights to enable posing, motion-capture driving, or physical simulation. Current generative models paradigms primarily yield static statues: models that process high-fidelity surface details but remain functionally inert, serving as mere decorations rather than interactive entities. A straightforward strategy to bridge this gap is a sequential “generate-then-rig” pipeline: first synthesize a static mesh using a state-of-the-art 3D generator [Xiang et al . 2025b], followed by an off-the-shelf auto-rigging algorithm [Deng et al . 2025; Liu et al .2025; Song et al . 2025a; Zhang et al . 2025]. Unfortunately, this de-coupled approach is brittle. Unlike artist-authored assets, which are modeled with clean topology and articulation in mind, generated meshes often contain “topological variances”, e.g., small geometric irregularities, diversely posed limbs, or ambiguous surface topology. While these variances may be visually negligible, they are cata-strophic for auto-riggers, which rely on precise topological cues to infer kinematic chains. As shown in Figure 2, this mismatch often leads to anatomically incorrect skelections or skinning artifacts that cause unnatural shearing during animation. In this work, we argue that this fragility stems from a fundamental 

representation mismatch . Geometry and articulation are not disjoint attributes to be processed sequentially; rather, they are inherently entangled. The shape of a character is functionally determined by its underlying skeleton, and the validity of a skeleton is constrained by the volume of the shape. Therefore, treating rigging as a post-processing step ignores the intrinsic cross-modal priors that exist between shape and function. To address this, we present AniGen , a unified generative frame-work that treats 3D shape, skeleton, and skinning as mutually con-sistent fields to be co-generated. Our key insight is to unify these distinct modalities into a common shared continuous representation, which we term 𝑆 3 Fields (𝑆 hape, 𝑆 keleton, 𝑆 kin). By representing the skeleton not as a discrete graph but as a dense vector field, and skinning not as a sparse matrix but as a dual feature field, we enable all three components to share the same spatial domain and genera-tive priors. Crucially, this unified representation enables a coherent TRELLIS UniRig Anymate          

> Puppeteer RigAnything AniGen
> Fig. 2. We present a case study combining TRELLIS [Xiang et al .2025b] with state-of-the-art auto-rigging baselines for animatable asset generation. Existing methods produce skeletons with missing bones (UniRig [Zhang et al .2025]), unstructured rigs (Anymate [Deng et al .2025]), or poor skinning (Puppeteer [Song et al .2025a], RigAnything [Liu et al .2025]). The resulting animations expose practical failure modes of this pipeline, whereas AniGen
> generates plausible skeletons and skinning that support stable character animation.

compression-generation pipeline that can effectively “grow” the ge-ometry and rig simultaneously. To make joint generation tractable, we introduce two key designs at the auto-encoding stage to com-press the 𝑆 3 Fields into structured sparse latents [Xiang et al . 2025b]. First, to address the inherent ambiguity of skeleton regression in regions equidistant to multiple bones (i.e., near Voronoi boundaries), we introduce a confidence-decaying skeleton field . This mechanism explicitly down-weights ambiguous regions during auto-encoder training, focusing supervision on high-certainty areas near kine-matic chains and thereby enforcing structural coherence. Second, to accommodate the wide variation in joint counts across object categories, we propose a Dual Skin Field representation, decoded via a pre-trained Skin Auto-Encoder (SkinAE). This design converts variable-cardinality skinning into a fixed-dimensional latent fea-ture space, enabling consistent compression of rigs with arbitrary complexity. Built upon these compressed latents, we train a sparse struc-tured flow-matching model [Xiang et al . 2025b] to generate struc-tured latent codes from image-conditioned noise, which are subse-quently decoded into geometry and rigging simultaneously. Ani-Gen demonstrates strong generalization capability, producing fully rigged, animate-ready 3D assets from single images across a broad range of categories, including humanoid characters, organic ani-mals, and articulated machinery. Extensive experiments show that 

AniGen consistently outperforms sequential baselines in rig validity and animation quality, representing a practical step toward the scal-able generation of functional 3D worlds. We additionally show that this joint modeling of geometry and articulation does not compro-mise geometric fidelity relative to strong geometry-only generators, making the method practical rather than merely structurally correct. In summary, our contributions are: 

• Unified Generative Formulation: We propose a holistic frame-work for the co-generation of shape, skeleton, and skinning as mutually aligned 𝑆 3 Fields, effectively eliminating the accumulation of errors inherent in sequential “generate-then-rig” pipelines. AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 3

• Confidence-Aware Skeleton Field: We introduce a confidence-decaying vector field representation that resolves structural ambiguity, enabling robust graph extraction from noisy vol-umetric predictions. 

• Joint-Count Agnostic Skinning: We devise a Dual Skin Field and SkinAE training strategy that allows generative models to synthesize rigs of arbitrary complexity. 

• State-of-the-Art Performance: We demonstrate that AniGen 

produces high-fidelity, animate-ready assets from in-the-wild images, outperforming existing auto-rigging baselines. 

2 Related Work 2.1 Conditional 3D Generation 

Early text-to-3D generation methods are predominantly optimization-based. DreamField [Jain et al . 2022] leverages CLIP [Radford et al .2021] to optimize NeRF [Mildenhall et al . 2021] renderings such that the reconstructed 3D scene aligns with a given text prompt. Building upon this paradigm, DreamFusion [Poole et al . 2023] intro-duces Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), which employs a pretrained image diffusion model [Ho et al . 2020; Song et al . 2021] to super-vise NeRF optimization. Subsequent “dreamer” variants [Liu et al .2024; Long et al . 2024; Wang et al . 2023b; Yu et al . 2023] further extend DreamFusion by improving the SDS formulation [Wang et al . 2023b; Yu et al . 2023], incorporating multi-view SDS supervi-sion [Liu et al . 2024; Shi et al . 2023], and introducing normal-domain constraints [Long et al. 2024]. Despite their effectiveness, optimization-based approaches are computationally expensive, often requiring hours to generate a single asset. To address this limitation, feed-forward methods have been proposed to directly infer 3D representations. Methods such as Zero-1-to-3 [Liu et al . 2023], Instant3D [Li et al . 2024], DMV3D [Xu et al . 2024], and CAT3D [Gao et al . 2024] first synthesize pose-conditioned multi-view images and then reconstruct 3D geometry using NeRF or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al . 2023]. In contrast, LRM [Hong et al . 2023] formulates 3D reconstruction as a direct regression problem by employing a transformer [Vaswani et al . 2017] to predict triplane representations from partial image observations. Building on this idea, TriplaneGaussian [Zou et al .2024] and LGM [Tang et al . 2024] replace volumetric representations with 3DGS to improve rendering quality and geometric fidelity. TripoSR [Tochilkin et al . 2024] further scales up LRM by leveraging larger datasets and refined architectural designs. However, under partial observations, such as a single image or a small number of views, recovering a complete 3D shape is inher-ently a generative task rather than a pure reconstruction problem. Consequently, regression-based feed-forward methods tend to pro-duce overly smoothed geometry, as they implicitly learn the data average and struggle to preserve fine-grained details. To mitigate this issue, VecSet [Zhang et al . 2023] proposes encoding 3D shapes into fixed-length token sequences and training diffusion models in the token space. Direct3D [Wu et al . 2024a] adopts VecSet tokens to predict triplanes that encode geometric structure, while Dora [Chen et al . 2025c] enhances detail preservation by adaptively sampling more points around sharp edges. Subsequent works, including Tri-poSG [Li et al . 2025c] and Clay [Zhang et al . 2024b], further improve performance by scaling up model capacity and leveraging larger, more carefully curated datasets. More recently, TRELLIS [Xiang et al . 2025b] has emerged as a leading framework for high-quality 3D generation, demonstrating the effectiveness of a two-stage generation paradigm. In the first stage, TRELLIS generates a sparse voxel representation that cap-tures the global structure of the shape. Conditioned on this sparse structure, the second stage refines geometry and details using rec-tified flow [Liu et al . 2022] operating on sparse tensors. Several follow-up works improve upon this framework. SparseFlex [He et al .2025] increases the voxel resolution in the first stage to 512 3 to en-hance geometric accuracy. Ultra3D [Chen et al . 2025b] replaces the voxel-based first stage with VecSet representations and feeds vox-elized outputs into the second-stage diffusion model. CUPID [Huang et al . 2025a] improves image-conditioned generation by predicting per-voxel UV coordinates in the first stage, leading to better align-ment with input images. Recently proposed TRELLIS 2 [Xiang et al .2025a] further advances this paradigm by substantially increasing the first-stage resolution to 1536 3 and incorporating high-quality PBR material prediction in the second stage, achieving state-of-the-art results and highlighting the advantages of two-stage 3D generation. Although these approaches produce geometry of excep-tional quality, they are limited to static representations and lack the articulation capabilities essential for interactive 3D applications. 

2.2 Automatic Rigging and Skinning 

Automatic rigging [Bærentzen et al . 2014; Borosán et al . 2012; Pandey et al . 2022; Xu et al . 2019] aims to equip static 3D meshes with skeletons and skinning weights to enable animation. To address animation and rigging challenges, structural representations for 3D shapes were initially proposed by Marr et al.[Marr and Nishihara 1978], focusing on spatial organization rather than surface geometry. Pinocchio[Baran and Popović 2007] introduced a fully automated method for embedding template skeletons into arbitrary 3D meshes, enabling animation-ready rigs with minimal manual intervention. RigNet [Xu et al . 2020] further advanced rigging through deep learn-ing but was limited to templates and T-poses. Subsequent works, such as Neural Blend Shapes [Li et al . 2021] and TARig [Ma and Zhang 2023], tackled rigging and skinning for humanoid charac-ters, while MoRig [Xu et al . 2022] used deforming point clouds for guidance. Other methods, such as NeuroSkinning [Liu et al . 2019] and DRiVE [Sun et al. 2025], also focus on skeleton prediction and skinning for human characters. More recently, general-purpose rigging methods have emerged. UniRig [Zhang et al . 2025] was one of the first to rig arbitrary shapes with an end-to-end auto-regressive model, followed by Rig-Anything [Liu et al . 2025], which applied a joint diffusion model for sequential joint generation. Anymate [Deng et al . 2025] introduced a modular approach to predict joints, connectivity, and skinning weights, while Puppeteer [Song et al . 2025a] leveraged an auto-regressive transformer to predict skeletons and drive motion via optimization. However, these methods typically function as post-processing steps that depend heavily on the distribution of the 4 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. Sparse  Transformer 

> Voxelize
> Voxelize

Encoder 𝓔 𝑳      

> Skeleton Voxels 𝑽 𝒔𝒌
> Skin Weights
> Skeleton
> 3D Shape DINOv2
> Skin Features 𝑾 𝒋
> Shape Voxels 𝑽
> Shape/Skin
> Features ( 𝒙 𝒔 ,𝒙 𝒔𝒌𝒊𝒏 )

Input  

> Shape Latents
> (𝒛 𝒔 ,𝒛 𝒔𝒌𝒊𝒏 )
> Skeleton Latents
> (𝒛 𝒔𝒌 )

Structured 

Latents 

> Skeleton
> Features ( 𝒙 𝒔𝒌 )
> Product
> Sparse  Transformer

Decoder 𝓓 𝑳  

> Skin Weights
> (𝓦 -Field)
> Skeleton
> (𝓑 -Field)
> 3D Shape
> (𝓢 -Field)
> FlexiCube  Skin Dec  Grouping
> Shape/Skin
> Features ( 𝒚 𝒔 ,𝒚 𝒔𝒌𝒊𝒏 )
> Skeleton
> Features ( 𝒚 𝒔 𝒌 )
> 𝑾 𝒗
> 𝑾 𝒋
> Skin Features

Output 

## Animatable 3D Assets Encoding & Decoding 

> Skin Enc

## Animatable 3D Assets Generation 

Sparse 

Structure 

Flow 

## 𝓖 𝑺 

> Condition

Dec   

> Sparse Structures
> (𝑽 ,𝑽 𝒔𝒌 )
> Condition

Structured 

Latent 

FLow 

## 𝓖 𝑳          

> Stuctured Noise
> (𝒛 𝒔
> ',𝒛 ′𝒔𝒌𝒊𝒏 ,𝐳 ′𝒔𝒌 )Noise ( 𝒛 %𝒔 ,𝒛 𝒔𝒌
> %𝒔 )Structured Latents
> (𝒛 ,𝒛 𝒔𝒌𝒊𝒏 ,𝐳 𝒔𝒌 )Animatable Shape

Stage I Stage II 

Dec 

## 𝓓 𝑳 

Dec 

## 𝓓 𝑺 

Fig. 3. Overview of the AniGen framework. The top panel illustrates the encoding and decoding of the 𝑆 3 fields using the structured latent autoencoder E𝐿 

and D𝐿 . From top to bottom, the three rows correspond to the shape, skin, and skeleton branches, respectively. The bottom panel depicts the generation pipeline for animatable 3D assets. Given an input image, the sparse structure flow model G𝑆 predicts voxel scaffolds that serve as supports for the shape and skeleton. Conditioned on these supports, a structured latent flow G𝐿 synthesizes the corresponding 𝑆 3 fields. Finally, the decoded outputs yield a 3D shape equipped with skeleton rigging and associated skinning, producing an animatable 3D asset. 

input mesh. They often struggle with topological, shape-, and pose-variances common in generative outputs, motivating our end-to-end approach where geometry and rigging are co-generated. 

2.3 Generative Dynamic & Articulated Assets 

Beyond generating static 3D content, researchers have also ex-plored creating animatable or dynamic 3D objects. One direction involves 4D generation. DreamGaussian4D [Ren et al . 2023] extends optimization-based methods to dynamic generation. Cat4D [Wu et al . 2025a] and SVG [Dai et al . 2025] use diffusion models to gen-erate spatial-temporal frame matrices for dynamic scenes but are limited in view range. SMRNet [Zhang et al . 2024a] and HMC [Wang et al . 2023a] animate existing 3D shapes by retargeting them with reference animations, while SC4D [Wu et al . 2024b] and Deform-Splat [Kim et al . 2025] optimize 3D shapes into dynamic motion with sparse control and local rigidity [Huang et al . 2024]. Ani-mateAnyMesh [Wu et al . 2025b] generates deformed mesh sequences using a feedforward model, and SS4D [Li et al . 2025b] predicts se-quential sparse structures and latent representations to produce dynamic scenes. While these methods generate dynamic content, they often lack flexible controllers to freely adjust pose and motion. Another direction explores combining rigging with motion syn-thesis or part-level articulation. Anytop [Gat et al . 2025] animates skeletons based on semantic joint names using a transformer with skeletal and temporal attention. AnimaX [Huang et al . 2025b] gen-erates multi-view videos of animated characters and derives pose parameters via triangulation and inverse kinematics. Similarly, An-imaMimic [Xie et al . 2025] combines UniRig with video priors to drive motion. Make-it-Poseable [Guo et al . 2025] bypasses skinning by directly animating meshes with their associated skeletons. For articulated objects, ArtiLatent [Chen et al . 2025a] generates sparse structures with articulation labels (e.g., part types and joint types), enabling dynamic objects like drawers or cabinets. Particulate [Li et al . 2025a] applies a part articulation transformer to predict artic-ulation labels, supporting downstream embodied AI tasks. Unlike these works, which often focus on rigid parts or video-driven priors, our framework unifies shape, skeleton, and skinning generation to produce fully animatable organic assets. 

3 Method 3.1 Overview 

Our goal is to generate a fully functional, animatable 3D asset from a single RGB image I. Formally, an animatable asset is a tuple A =

(M , K, W) , consisting of a 3D mesh geometry M, a hierarchical AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 5

skeleton K (joints and connectivity), and skinning weights W that bind the geometry to the skeleton. Existing approaches typically treat this as a sequential pipeline: generating a static mesh M first, and then predicting K and W

via post-processing. This separation often leads to topological mis-matches, where the generated geometry lacks the structural in-tegrity required for articulation (e.g., fused limbs). 

AniGen fundamentally departs from this paradigm by modeling 

𝑆 hape, 𝑆 keleton, and 𝑆 kinning as a unified, spatially aligned rep-resentation which we term 𝑆 3 Fields (Sec. 3.2). By representing articulation properties as continuous fields sharing the same spatial domain as the geometry, we ensure mutual consistency. To synthesize these fields from a single image, we devise a two-stage generative pipeline (see Fig. 3): 

• Representation & Compression: We first learn to compress the continuous 𝑆 3 Fields into a compact, sparse structural representation. We employ a sparse structure auto-encoder (E𝑆 , D𝑆 ) to capture the coarse spatial layout and a structured latent auto-encoder ( E𝐿 , D𝐿 ) to encode fine-grained geom-etry and skinning features into a low-dimensional latent space (Sec. 3.3). 

• Generative Flow: We then train two flow-matching models to synthesize these representations from the input image. A sparse structure flow model first predicts the spatial occu-pancy and skeleton graph, followed by a structured latent flow model that “paints” the geometry and skinning details onto this structure (Sec. 3.4). 

3.2 𝑆 3 Fields 

A core challenge in generating animatable assets is that skeletons and skinning weights are traditionally irregular data structures (graphs and sparse matrices), which are difficult to generate using standard convolutional or transformer architectures that assume fixed grid topologies. We resolve this by lifting them into continuous fields defined over the shared 3D domain R3. We collectively term this representation 𝑆 3 Fields. 

3.2.1 Shape Field S. Following recent state-of-the-art 3D gener-ation method [Xiang et al . 2025b], we define the shape field over a set of active sparse voxels V ⊂ { 0, 1}𝑁 3

that track the mesh surface. Formally, the Shape Field S maps each active voxel coordi-nate 𝑣 ∈ V to a set of local geometric and appearance parameters required by FlexiCubes [Shen et al. 2023] for mesh extraction: 

S( 𝑣 ) = [d, n, c, fflex ] ∈ R𝐶 S , (1) where d ∈ R8 denotes the signed distances at the voxel corners, 

n ∈ R8×3 and c ∈ R8×3 represent corner normals and colors, and 

f𝑓 𝑙𝑒𝑥 contains the FlexiCubes-specific interpolation and splitting weights [Shen et al . 2023]. This explicit parameterization enables the extraction of high-quality, watertight meshes M directly from the field components. Since color is stored in the same field, the final textured mesh can be obtained during surface extraction. 

3.2.2 Skeleton Field B. A skeleton is conventionally represented as a set of joints organized in a tree structure in Euclidean space. How-ever, such a discrete graph representation is ill-suited for generative modeling: it lacks a fixed spatial support, does not align naturally with volumetric or grid-based shape representations, and is difficult to co-generate with geometry using shared model structures. To this end, we represent the skeleton K not as a graph, but as a dense vector field, allowing it to be co-generated with the shape using the same model architecture. Let K = {𝐽 1, . . . , 𝐽 𝑀 } be the set of discrete joints in Euclidean space. The Skeleton Field B : R3 → R6 maps any point 𝑥 ∈ R3 to a vector pair pointing to its nearest joint 𝑗 (𝑥 ) ∈ K 

and that joint’s parent 𝑝 (𝑥 ) ∈ K :

B( 𝑥 ) = [( 𝑗 (𝑥 ) − 𝑥 ) ⊕ ( 𝑝 (𝑥 ) − 𝑥 )] , (2) where ⊕ denotes concatenation. This relative parameterization en-sures the field is translation-invariant and local. 

Voxel Support V𝑠𝑘 . To model this field efficiently, we parameterize it using latent features distributed across a specific set of sparse voxels V𝑠𝑘 . Critically, we cannot simply reuse the shape voxels V

for this purpose, as V tracks the surface boundary, whereas skele-ton joints often reside deep within the object’s volume (far from surface voxels). Therefore, we define V𝑠𝑘 as the set of voxels inter-sected by the skeleton bones. To ensure robust coverage and prevent disconnection during generation, we dilate V𝑠𝑘 with a radius of 2

voxels. This ensures the field is defined on a continuous, volumetric structure enveloping the kinematic chains (see Fig. 4). (b) Shape Voxels  (c) Skeleton Voxels (a) Shape & Skeleton  (d) Skeleton Field    

> Confidence Decay
> Nearest Mapping
> Fig. 4. Illustration of the (b) shape voxels V, (c) skeleton voxels V𝑠𝑘 , and the (d) confidence-decaying nearest-neighbor joint field.

Confidence-Aware Prediction. A major challenge in regression-based skeleton prediction arises near Voronoi boundaries between joints, where the identity of the nearest bone changes abruptly. At these locations, the regression target becomes discontinuous, caus-ing ambiguous supervision and unstable gradients during training. Standard Bayesian uncertainty learning strategies [Kendall and Gal 2017] often struggle here, as they rely on a learned variance that is difficult to weight against the regression loss and cannot guaran-tee low confidence scores in ambiguous regions (see Sec. 4.6). To mitigate this, we augment the field with a scalar confidence score 

𝑐 (𝑥 ) ∈ [ 0, 1]. We explicitly supervise the confidence using a geo-metric metric that reflects the ambiguity of joint assignment. For a voxel center 𝑣 𝑐 , let 𝑗 𝑔𝑡 be the nearest joint and 𝑗 𝑔𝑡  

> 2𝑛𝑑

be the second nearest. We define the ground truth (GT) confidence as: 

𝑐 𝑔𝑡 (𝑣 𝑐 ) = 1 − ∥𝑣 𝑐 − 𝑗 𝑔𝑡 ∥2

∥𝑣 𝑐 − 𝑗 𝑔𝑡  

> 2𝑛𝑑

∥2 ∈ [ 0, 1]. (3) The model predicts an extra scalar field to fit this target. Cru-cially, we use 𝑐 𝑔𝑡 to weight the regression loss for joint and parent predictions. This forces the model to focus on the high-certainty regions near bones while suppressing gradients from ambiguous 6 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

boundaries. Additionally, the learned confidence field facilitates the next joint recovery stage. 

From Continuous Field to Discrete Skeleton. During inference, we can recover the discrete skeleton K from the predicted field B and confidence 𝑐 . For every center 𝑣 𝑖 ∈ V 𝑠𝑘 , we derive a voting joint 

ˆ𝑗 𝑖 and corresponding parent ˆ𝑝 𝑖 using the predicted Skeleton Field 

ˆB( 𝑣 ). We then employ a confidence-weighted iterative clustering algorithm (detailed in Alg. 1) to enhance the joint prediction accu-racy: we iteratively shift the voting points toward the centroid of their local neighborhood, weighted by their predicted confidence. This effectively concentrates votes into tight clusters. The final confidence-weighted centroids are identified as joints, and isolated low-confidence points are filtered out to remove noise. Addition-ally, the clustering process estimates the parent location for each cluster. By connecting the cluster centroid to its closest estimated parent, the joints are sequentially linked to form the skeleton. Fig. 5 provides an intuitive illustration of this conversion. (a) Continuous Joint  

> Field over 𝑉 sk
> (b) Joint Vote
> Clustering
> (c) Parent Vote
> Clustering
> (d) Skeleton
> Construction
> ROOT

Fig. 5. Illustration of the conversion from a continuous field to a discrete skeleton. The voting results of the joint field in (a) are clustered to obtain discrete joints in (b) and parent nodes in (c). The skeletal topology is then determined by assigning each parent to its nearest joint as in (d). 

3.2.3 Dual Skin Field W. Skinning weights represent a normal-ized probability distribution indicating how each vertex follows the motion of the underlying skeleton. Parameterizing this relationship directly with a neural network is non-trivial because the number of joints, 𝑁 𝑗 , varies significantly across different asset categories. This variability precludes the use of standard regression layers with fixed output dimensions. To overcome this, we propose a Dual Skin Field formulation that factorizes the skinning function into two implicit feature fields de-fined over the shape voxels V and skeleton voxels V𝑠𝑘 , respectively: 

W, W𝑠𝑘 : R3 → R𝐷 skin , (4) where 𝐷 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑛 denotes the dimension of the shared latent embedding space. 

• The Surface Skin Field W encodes local deformability and segmentation cues of the geometry. This field is instantiated as 𝑦 skin in the auto-encoder, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 

• The Skeleton Skin Field W𝑠𝑘 encodes the influence charac-teristics of the skeletal structure. This field is instantiated as parts of 𝑦 𝑠𝑘 in the auto-encoder, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This representation effectively decouples the network architec-ture from the specific joint count. To recover the explicit skinning weights 𝑤 𝑣 ∈ R𝑁 𝑗 for a query vertex 𝑣 and a generated set of joints 

{ 𝑗 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑗 

> 𝑖 =1

, we query the fields to obtain the vertex feature W ( 𝑣 ) and the joint features {W 𝑠𝑘 ( 𝑗 𝑖 )} 𝑁 𝑗 

> 𝑖 =1

. These features are mapped to a shared compatibility space via a lightweight MLP, and the final weights are computed using a cross-attention operation, ensuring that 𝑤 𝑣 forms a valid partition of unity (sums to 1). For more imple-mentation details, please refer to Sec.3.3.1 and Fig.6. This allows our generative model to predict fixed-size feature maps that naturally generalize to rigs of arbitrary complexity. 

ALGORITHM 1: Field-to-Skeleton Clustering 

Input : J, P ∈ R𝑁 ×3; confidences c ∈ R𝑁 ×1 (default ones); threshold 𝜏 ; bandwidth ℎ; min cluster size 𝑠 min .

Output : Grouped joints ¯J ∈ R𝑀 ×3; parent indices 

𝝅 ∈ {− 1, . . . , 𝑀 − 1}𝑀 .

S ← J

for 𝑡 ← 1 to 10 do for 𝑖 ← 1 to |S| do 

N𝑖 ← neighbors of S𝑖 within radius ℎ𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 ← 𝑐 𝐽 𝑗 exp (− ∥S𝑗 −S𝑖 ∥2 

> 2ℎ2

) ∀ 𝑗 ∈ N 𝑖 

S′ 

> 𝑖

←

Í𝑗 ∈N 𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 S𝑗 

Í𝑗 ∈N 𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 + 10 −8

end if max 𝑖 ∥S′ 

> 𝑖

− S𝑖 ∥ ≤ 110 ℎ then break end 

S ← S′

end 

Cluster S with merge radius 𝑟 = ℎ 

> 2

to get labels ℓ𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝑁 𝑐 }

for 𝑘 ← 1 to 𝑁 𝑐 do 

˜J𝑘 ←

Í𝑖 :ℓ𝑖 =𝑘 𝑐 𝐽 𝑖 J𝑖 

Í𝑖 :ℓ𝑖 =𝑘 𝑐 𝐽 𝑖 

; ˜P𝑘 ←

Í𝑖 :ℓ𝑖 =𝑘 𝑐 𝑃 𝑖 P𝑖 

Í𝑖 :ℓ𝑖 =𝑘 𝑐 𝑃 𝑖 

end 

Keep clusters with | { 𝑖 : ℓ𝑖 = 𝑘 } | ≥ 𝑠 min to obtain ¯J, ¯P

for 𝑘 ← 1 to 𝑀 do 

𝜋 𝑘 ← arg min 𝑢 ∥ ¯P𝑘 − ¯J𝑢 ∥2

end return ¯J, 𝝅 

3.3 Latent Representation of 𝑆 3 Fields 

To enable scalable generative modeling of complex 𝑆 3 fields, we must project them onto a compact, lower-dimensional manifold. We achieve this via a hierarchical compression strategy that disen-tangles coarse structural topology from fine-grained geometry and articulation. Unlike standard Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [kin 2014] commonly used in latent diffusion, we employ Denoising Auto-Encoders (DAEs) . This design choice, aligned with recent findings in generative modeling [Yang et al . 2025; Yao et al . 2025], provides a latent space that is structurally better suited for the linear interpo-lation trajectory of flow matching. To ensure training stability and prevent the model from exploit-ing unbounded feature magnitudes to trivialize the reconstruction task (which leads to singularities in the flow field), we strictly nor-malize all latent features onto a unit ℓ1-norm hypersphere. Without this constraint, we observe that the DAE can artificially inflate the latent norm to enlarge pairwise sample distances, which improves reconstruction shortcuts but makes the subsequent flow-matching objective substantially harder. During training, we perturb the clean AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 7

encoded latent 𝑧 with standard Gaussian noise 𝑛 , mixed via a coeffi-cient 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 𝑡 max ], i.e., 𝑧 sample = 𝑡 · 𝑛 + ( 1 − 𝑡 ) · 𝑧 . To further stabilize the learning process, we implement a curriculum schedule where 

𝑡 max is linearly increased from 0 to 0.75 over the course of training. 

3.3.1 Prerequisite: Skin Auto-Encoder (SkinAE). Before introducing the main auto-encoder that compresses the full 𝑆 3 Fields, we first describe how skinning information is encoded into latent features. Skinning weights 𝑊 ∈ R𝑁 𝑣 ×𝑁 𝑗 inherently depend on the number of joints 𝑁 𝑗 , which varies significantly across asset categories (e.g., 

𝑁 𝑗 = 10 for a fish versus 𝑁 𝑗 = 52 for a humanoid). This variable cardinality makes explicit skinning matrices incompatible with stan-dard neural networks that require fixed input channel dimensions. To address this issue, we introduce SkinAE , which learns a joint-count–agnostic representation of skinning. Rather than representing skinning as a joint-indexed matrix, SkinAE factorizes it into fixed-dimensional joint embeddings and vertex embeddings , thereby decou-pling the representation from the number of joints while preserving articulation structure. 

Architecture. SkinAE comprises a Transformer-based encoder and a lightweight MLP decoder, as shown in Fig. 6. (1) Joint Encoding: Given a set of skeleton joints 𝑗 𝑖 𝑁 𝑗 

> 𝑖 =1

, we com-pute parent-relative edge vectors 𝑒 𝑖 = 𝑗 𝑖 − 𝑝 𝑖 , apply posi-tional encoding (PE), and concatenate them with parent features to incorporate structural information. A Trans-former encoder processes these to generate joint skin fea-tures 𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 ∈ R𝐶 , (𝐶 = 4).(2) Vertex Encoding: Corresponding vertex embeddings {𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 ∈

R𝐶 } are computed via the skin-weighted average of the joint embeddings. It makes the vertex skin features of a fixed channel dimension independent of 𝑁 𝑗 . This compresses the sparse skinning matrix into a dense and fixed-channel vertex field. (3) Decoding: A lightweight decoder MLP lifts these features to a higher dimension ( R64 ) and reconstructs the original skinning weights via channel-wise compatibility :

𝑤 𝑘 (𝑣 ) = Softmax 𝑖 

1˜𝑇 𝑣 𝑘 

⟨ ˜𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 , ˜𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 ⟩

!

. (5) Here, ˜𝑊 denotes output features produced by the decoder MLPs (see Fig. 6). We pre-train SkinAE using 3D points sampled directly from the mesh surface and freeze the network weights for the subsequent stages. Empirically, we find this pre-training strategy is essential for the convergence and performance of the structured latent auto-encoder (as demonstrated in Sec. 4.6). This step effectively converts the variable-cardinality skinning regression task into a fixed-channel feature matching task , enabling the generative models to synthesize skinning fields for rigs of any complexity. 

3.3.2 Sparse Structure Auto-Encoder E𝑆 & D𝑆 . The first stage of our pipeline captures the coarse spatial layout. The Sparse Structure Auto-Encoder learns compact discrete representations from two aligned volumetric inputs: the shape occupancy grid V ∈ { 0, 1}64 3

and the skeleton occupancy grid V𝑠𝑘 (defined in Sec. 3.2.2). Skin Enc                               

> MHA
> 6×
> Output
> {𝑊 !
> "}
> Weighted
> Su m
> Skin Dec
> PE & Linear
> {𝑗 !}
> Input
> {𝑝 !}{𝑤 #
> $% }
> Subtrac t
> Output
> {𝑊 #
> &}
> {𝑊 !
> "}{𝑊 #
> &}
> Output
> MLP 4×
> {𝑊 *!
> "}{𝑊 *#
> &}{𝑇 ,#
> &}
> Cross Attention
> Softmax
> Output
> {𝑤 #
> '()* }
> MLP 4×
> Concat with
> Parent’s
> Fig. 6. SkinAE encodes skeleton joints 𝑗 𝑖 and parents 𝑝 𝑖 into joint skin features 𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 , which are averaged by GT skin weights 𝑤 𝑔𝑡 𝑘 to obtain vertex skin features 𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 . The decoder processes 𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 and 𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 via MLPs, producing
> ˜𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 ,˜𝑊 𝑘 𝑣 , and vertex temperatures ˜𝑇 𝑘 𝑣 . Final skin weights are obtained through cross-attention and Softmax with temperature adjustment.

The encoder E𝑆 processes each input with a lightweight 3D con-volutional network. We utilize strided 3D convolutions to downsam-ple the spatial resolution, followed by multi-resolution 3D residual blocks to capture multi-scale structural dependencies. This process yields two distinct compressed latent volumes: 𝑧 𝑠 ∈ R16 3 ×8 for the shape structure and 𝑧 𝑠 𝑠𝑘 ∈ R16 3 ×4 for the skeleton structure. Con-versely, the decoder D𝑆 maps these latents back to the original resolution using progressive 3D upsampling and residual blocks. The network terminates in two separate output heads that recon-struct the binary occupancy probabilities for the shape and skeleton volumes, respectively. 

3.3.3 Structured Latent Auto-Encoder E𝐿 & D𝐿 . The Structured Latent Auto-Encoder ( E𝐿 , D𝐿 ) serves as the core engine for high-fidelity reconstruction (see Fig. 3, top). Using the sparse voxels V

and V𝑠𝑘 as scaffolds, it encodes the fine-grained 𝑆 3 fields into a continuous latent space. 

Input Feature Construction. We construct voxel-aligned sparse inputs from both multi-view and geometry observations: 

• Shape ( 𝑥 s): Defined on V. We back-project multi-view DI-NOv2 [Oquab et al . 2024] features onto the voxel grid fol-lowing TRELLIS [Xiang et al. 2025b]. 

• Skinning ( 𝑥 skin ): Defined on V. For each occupied voxel, we query the nearest point on the ground-truth mesh and assign it the corresponding vertex embedding 𝑊 𝑣 derived from the frozen SkinAE. 

• Skeleton ( 𝑥 sk ): Defined on V𝑠𝑘 . We concatenate the positional embeddings of the nearest joint and its parent, along with the joint embedding 𝑊 𝑗 from SkinAE. 

Encoding & Decoding. The encoder E𝐿 employs a multi-stream sparse Transformer backbone (12 Swin-style blocks [Liu et al . 2021]) to process these inputs, producing three latent volumes (𝑧 𝑠 , 𝑧 skin , 𝑧 sk )

with channel dimensions 8, 4, and 4, respectively. The decoder D𝐿 8 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

applies the same multi-stream sparse Transformer backbone to ob-tain hidden features (ℎ𝑠 , ℎ skin , ℎ sk ). It then upsamples the shape and skin latents to high resolution ( 256 3) to predict: (i) the Shape Field 

𝑦 𝑠 for FlexiCubes extraction, and (ii) the Vertex Feature Field 𝑦 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑛 

for predicting {𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 }. Simultaneously, the skeleton branch decodes the Skeleton Field 𝑦 sk (vectors and confidence) and Joint Feature Field for predicting {𝑊 𝑗 𝑖 }. The final asset is assembled by extracting the mesh via Marching FlexiCubes, clustering the skeleton field into discrete joints (Sec. 3.2.2), and decoding the skinning weights using the SkinAE decoder on the predicted features. The reconstructed shape is thus rigged with a predicted skeleton, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 

Confidence-Weighted Supervision. We supervise the geometry with standard rendering losses (depth, normal, color). For the skele-ton and skeleton-side skinning fields ( W𝑠𝑘 ), which are both rep-resented by 𝑦 sk , we employ confidence-weighted supervision to mitigate border ambiguity (see Sec. 3.2.2). The regression loss for a joint prediction 𝑗 𝑣 𝑐 at voxel 𝑣 𝑐 is: 

𝐿 𝐽 = E𝑣 𝑐 

𝑐 𝑔𝑡 (𝑣 𝑐 ) ∥ 𝑗 𝑣 𝑐 − 𝑗 𝑔𝑡 𝑣 𝑐 ∥22

 , (6) where 𝑐 𝑔𝑡 is the ground-truth confidence (Eq. 3). The same weight-ing is applied to parent predictions and skin feature 𝑊 𝑗 predictions in the skeleton branch. Furthermore, the structured latent auto-encoder is trained with feature reconstruction losses for the surface-side skinning embeddings. The sparse-structure auto-encoder, aug-mented with an additional branch to encode V𝑠𝑘 , is optimized using binary occupancy reconstruction losses on both V and V𝑠𝑘 .

BVH-Accelerated Skin Transfer. To supervise the predicted vertex skin features {𝑊 𝑣 𝑘 }, we must match them to the ground truth (GT). Since the predicted mesh topology differs from the GT mesh, we transfer GT skin features via nearest-surface interpolation. To make this efficient during training, we implement a CUDA-based Bound-ing Volume Hierarchy (BVH) that caches the GT geometry. This reduces average query time from 48.6 ms to 2.6 ms ( 18 .6× speedup). Crucially, as shown in Fig. 7, BVH-based barycentric transfer is more robust to uneven vertex sampling than simple nearest-vertex matching. Skeleton Skin NN Transfer BVH Transfer 

Fig. 7. BVH-based skin transfer vs. nearest-vertex (NN) transfer. We imple-ment a CUDA BVH supporting multi-device deployment and save/restore. 

3.4 Generative Flow Model 

We model the generation of animatable assets as a conditional flow matching problem. Formally, we aim to learn a velocity field 𝑣 𝑡 that transports a standard Gaussian distribution 𝜋 0 = N ( 0, 𝐼 ) to the data distribution 𝜋 1 of our compressed representations. To handle the complex interplay between topological structure and dense attributes (i.e., geometry and skinning weights), we decompose the generation process into two cascaded stages: Sparse Structure Flow 

(G𝑆 ) and Structured Latent Flow (G𝐿 ). Fig. 8 illustrates our flow model architecture. Sparse Structure Flow 𝓖 𝑺   

> MHA
> 24 ×
> AdaLN
> Output
> 𝑣 !
> Adapter
> Linear Linear
> Structured Latent Flow

𝓖 𝑳                  

> Sp.Conv.
> Up.Conv. Up.Conv. Linear
> MHA
> 24 ×
> AdaLN
> Adapter
> PE & Linear PE & Linear
> MHA
> AdaLN
> Adapter
> MHA
> AdaLN
> Adapter
> MHA
> AdaLN
> Sp.Conv. Sp.Conv.
> Output
> 𝑣 "#
> !
> Output
> 𝑣 "
> Output
> 𝑣 "#$%
> Output
> 𝑣 "#
> 24 ×24 ×24 ×
> x&! Cond Time 𝑥 &"#
> !𝑥 "
> &Cond Time 𝑥 "#$%
> &
> Time 𝑥 "#
> &Time
> Input Input Input Input

Fig. 8. The architectures of the AniGen flow models, G𝑆 and G𝐿 . The input to G𝑆 comprises noisy volumetric features encoding geometry, 𝑧 ′𝑠 ,and skeleton information, 𝑧 ′𝑠 skl . G𝐿 processes noisy structured latents representing geometry, 𝑧 ′s, skin, 𝑧 ′skin , and skeleton, 𝑧 ′skl . These flow models predict the velocities of the noisy features and iteratively denoise them using the Euler method. 

3.4.1 Stage I: Sparse Structure Flow G𝑆 . The first stage constructs the scaffold of the asset. Conditioned on image features, G𝑆 predicts the active sparse voxel sets for both the shape ( V) and the skeleton (V𝑠𝑘 ). We instantiate G𝑆 as a dual-stream Transformer. Rather than concatenating shape and skeleton into a single sequence (which obscures their distinct topological roles), we process them in parallel branches: 

• Shape Branch: Predicts the binary occupancy of surface-crossing voxels. 

• Skeleton Branch: Predicts the binary occupancy of bone-containing voxels. 

Cross-Structural Adapters. A naïve dual-stream approach risks generating a skeleton that drifts outside the mesh. To enforce spa-tial compatibility, we introduce lightweight linear adapters that exchange information between the two branches at every Trans-former block. This bidirectional fusion ensures the skeleton “grows” strictly within the geometric bounds of the shape. AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 9

3.4.2 Stage II: Structured Latent Flow G𝐿 . Given the generated scaf-folds, the second stage synthesizes the 𝑆 3 field latent features. G𝐿 is trained to denoise the latent codes 𝑧 s, 𝑧 skin , and 𝑧 sk .

Architecture. Similar to Stage I, we employ a multi-branch archi-tecture. Since geometry and skinning share the same spatial domain (V), we process them in a primary branch, while the skeleton latent 

𝑧 sk (defined on V𝑠𝑘 ) is processed in a secondary branch. We again utilize adapter layers to enforce consistency between the predicted skinning features and the underlying skeletal structure. 

Controllable Joint Density. A key advantage of our joint-count agnostic representation (Sec. 3.3.1) is that the network is not bound to a specific rig topology. We exploit this by introducing joint den-sity as an explicit conditional input. During training, we compute the normalized joint count of the ground truth asset. This scalar is embedded and injected into the flow model via AdaLN modu-lation [Peebles and Xie 2023]. At inference, users can adjust this scalar to control the granularity of the rig without changing the underlying geometry (visualized in Fig. 11). 

4 Experiment 4.1 Experimental Setup 

4.1.1 Dataset and Implementation. We adopt ArticulationXL [Song et al . 2025b] as our evaluation dataset, which contains approxi-mately 33K rigged 3D shapes curated from Objaverse-XL [Deitke et al . 2023a,b]. We randomly sample 1K shapes to form the test set. To increase motion diversity, we augment the dataset in two ways. For assets with existing animation sequences, we generate additional samples by interpolating within the asset’s own motion. Otherwise, we apply stochastic joint perturbations: each joint has 80% probability of being rotated around a random axis by a jitter of up to 60 ◦. Because ArticulationXL is relatively small (in contrast to the ∼10M shapes in Objaverse-XL) and is insufficient for training a generative flow model from scratch, we adopt a warm-start initial-ization strategy. Specifically, we initialize the shared branches of the autoencoders and flow modules in AniGen with pre-trained TRELLIS parameters [Xiang et al . 2025b], effectively leveraging large-scale geometric priors to facilitate the learning of joint representation. In implementation, we first pre-train SkinAE and then freeze it when training the structured latent auto-encoder. 

4.1.2 Baselines. To the best of our knowledge, no existing method directly generates fully rigged 3D shapes – comprising geometry, articulated skeleton, and skinning – in a unified manner. Therefore, we construct strong baselines by coupling state-of-the-art automatic rigging methods with the recent 3D generative model TRELLIS [Xi-ang et al . 2025b]: we first generate a shape using TRELLIS, and then apply an off-the-shelf rigging algorithm to infer the skeleton and skinning weights. For a fair comparison under the same data domain and pose distribution, we further fine-tune TRELLIS on Ar-ticulationXL using the same pose-augmented training set described above. We refer to this variant as TRELLIS ∗ in Tab.1. The rigging methods we evaluate in this pipeline include UniRig[Zhang et al .2025], Anymate [Deng et al . 2025], Puppeteer [Song et al . 2025a], and RigAnything [Liu et al. 2025]. 

4.1.3 Metrics. Following UniRig [Zhang et al . 2025], we adopt three Chamfer-style metrics to quantify skeletal geometric accuracy: joint-to-joint , joint-to-bone , and bone-to-bone distances. While these met-rics capture local Euclidean proximity, they are insufficient for com-prehensive evaluation of skeleton structure. In particular, they do not treat a skeleton as a metric measure space and therefore can be insensitive to structural/topological errors. For example, inserting an extra joint along a ground-truth (GT) bone may not change the joint-to-bone or bone-to-bone distances, and adding a duplicated branch extremely close to a correct branch can still yield negligi-ble Chamfer distances. This many-to-one matching bias inherently masks critical errors in kinematic connectivity and hierarchy. To address this limitation, we incorporate Optimal Transport-based metrics, specifically the Wasserstein distance [Givens and Shortt 1984] and Gromov–Wasserstein (GW) distance [Mémoli 2011], which explicitly account for the global distribution. Formally, we use the 𝐿 2-Wasserstein distance (Earth Mover’s Distance) between joint measures: 

D𝑊 (𝜇, 𝜈 ) = min    

> 𝜋 ∈Π(𝑎,𝑏 )
> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

𝜋 𝑖𝑘 ∥ 𝑗 𝑖 − 𝑗 𝑔𝑡 𝑘 ∥22

! 12

, (7) where 𝜋 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑚  

> +

is a transport plan with Í𝑘 𝜋 𝑖𝑘 = Í𝑖 𝜋 𝑖𝑘 = 1. Com-pared with Chamfer distances, the Wasserstein distance enforces a global mass-preserving matching, which mitigates many-to-one correspondences. However, it still relies on the ambient Euclidean cost and therefore does not explicitly encode skeletal topology. To make the metric topology/structure-aware, we further com-pute the GW distance between the predicted skeleton graph and the GT skeleton graph by comparing intrinsic pairwise distances. Let 

𝑑 p (𝑖, 𝑖 ′) denote the geodesic distance along the predicted skeleton graph between predicted joints 𝑖 and 𝑖 ′, and let 𝑑 g (𝑘, 𝑘 ′) be defined analogously on the GT skeleton. The GW objective is 

D𝐺𝑊 (𝜇, 𝜈 ) = min    

> 𝜋 ∈Π(𝑎,𝑏 )
> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖,𝑖 ′=1
> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑘,𝑘 ′=1

𝑑 p (𝑖, 𝑖 ′) − 𝑑 gt (𝑘, 𝑘 ′) 2 𝜋 𝑖𝑘 𝜋 𝑖 ′𝑘 ′

! 12

.

(8) By matching geodesic structures rather than only Euclidean coordi-nates, GW penalizes topological inconsistencies such as spurious branches or incorrect connectivity even when the geometry is lo-cally close. In practice, the OT problems in Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) can be efficiently solved via iterative Sinkhorn updates. Given the opti-mal transport plan from Wasserstein distance, we align predicted skinning weights to GT and then report ℓ1, ℓ2, and KL divergence between the aligned skinning distributions. 

4.2 Quantitative Evaluation 

We summarize the quantitative evaluation results in Tab. 1, in-cluding Chamfer distances, mm-space distances, and skin metrics. Note that TRELLIS ∗ refers to the finetuned TRELLIS model trained on the split train set. Because every method is image-conditioned rather than GT-conditioned, the generated asset is not expected to be an exact replica of the GT shape. We therefore normalize scale, center the prediction, and then align it to the GT with ICP using 100 10 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of skeleton accuracy and skin metrics for various methods. Results include Chamfer distances, mm-space distances, Wasserstein-based distances, and skin metrics ( ℓ1, ℓ2, KL divergence). The best scores are highlighted in bold, and the second-best scores are underlined. Note that TRELLIS ∗ refers to the finetuned TRELLIS model trained on the split train set, while GT-Mesh combined with rigging methods serves as a reference. 

Method Joint-to-Joint ↓ Joint-to-Bone ↓ Bone-to-Bone ↓ Wasserstein ↓ Gromov–Wasserstein ↓ Skin ℓ1 ↓ Skin ℓ2 ↓ Skin KL ↓

GT-Mesh + UniRig 0.190 0.180 0.166 0.260 0.389 0.0973 0.224 6.117 GT-Mesh + Anymate 0.169 0.161 0.145 0.232 0.368 0.0918 0.204 4.388 GT-Mesh + Puppeteer 0.235 0.228 0.212 0.239 0.322 0.0823 0.197 4.133 

GT-Mesh + RigAnything 0.193 0.181 0.165 0.268 0.392 0.1018 0.223 6.161 TRELLIS ∗ + UniRig 0.205 0.192 0.179 0.269 0.397 0.0966 0.221 5.903 TRELLIS ∗ + Anymate 0.179 0.172 0.157 0.232 0.349 0.0919 0.203 4.221 TRELLIS ∗ + Puppeteer 0.245 0.237 0.219 0.241 0.326 0.0873 0.202 4.135 TRELLIS ∗ + RigAnything 0.273 0.264 0.252 0.285 0.383 0.1026 0.224 6.451 

AniGen 0.174 0.164 0.143 0.229 0.286 0.0793 0.186 2.919 

Fig. 9. Qualitative comparison of skeleton and skin results across different methods. We visualize the predicted skeletons, corresponding skins, and demonstrate animations to evaluate the practical usability of the rigged assets. The dragon case represents a relatively simple example with a clear identity and four-limbed structure, while the flower case poses a more complex challenge due to its intricate and non-standard structure. AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 11 Input Image View 1 View 2 Skeleton Skin Pose 1 Pose 2 

Fig. 10. Qualitative results on in-the-wild images, including examples from real-world photographs, web content, and AI-generated imagery. The showcased objects span a wide range of categories, such as sea animals, household items, cartoon characters, pets, humans, birds, plants, and machinery. Edited poses are demonstrated to illustrate animation capabilities, with examples such as a whale swimming, a lamp adjusting its angle, a dog running, and a robotic arm picking up an apple. These results highlight the versatility and practical usability of AniGen for applications in animation, games, image editing, VR, and more. 12 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

randomly initialized rotations. The results demonstrate that AniGen 

achieves the best performance in skeleton structure prediction and skin accuracy across all baselines. This establishes AniGen as the leading end-to-end image-conditioned rigged shape generation so-lution. Notably, AniGen excels in Gromov-Wasserstein distance and skin KL divergence, achieving significant advantages over the other baselines in the accuracy of skeleton topology and skin weights. Additionally, we provide results from coupling GT meshes with off-the-shelf rigging methods to serve as an upper-bound reference. While these GT-input baselines naturally exhibit better results, it is worth noting that generation models often produce geometries that deviate slightly from the GT due to minor variations in scale, rotation, and pose. 

Geometry Evaluation. We further report geometry-and-fidelity metrics in Tab. 2. AniGen remains competitive with TRELLIS ∗, it shows only a small gap, while substantially improving the rigging-related metrics in Tab. 1. This confirms that jointly modeling shape, skeleton, and skin does not substantially degrade geometry qual-ity. Pure geometry generation can still be slightly stronger under geometry-only metrics, which we consider a minor limitation, but the gap is small relative to the articulation gains.                     

> Table 2. Geometry evaluation on the rigged-domain test set. We report surface Chamfer distance, F-score, and image-space PSNR & LPIPS.
> Method Chamfer ↓F-Score ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> TRELLIS 0.0475 0.77 24.25 0.126 TRELLIS ∗0.0394 0.89 25.23 0.104
> AniGen 0.0409 0.88 25.12 0.108

Inference Cost Evaluation. We report end-to-end inference cost in Tab. 3. AniGen is comparable to the fastest sequential baseline while avoiding the heavy post-hoc rigging overhead of methods such as UniRig and RigAnything.               

> Table 3. Inference cost runtime comparison.
> Method TRELLIS ∗TRELLIS ∗+UniRig TRELLIS ∗+Anymate Time (s) ↓15 146 19 Method TRELLIS ∗+Puppeteer TRELLIS ∗+RigAnything AniGen
> Time (s) ↓36 127 19

4.3 Qualitative Evaluation 

To provide a more intuitive comparison, we present qualitative results across various baselines in Fig. 9. We visualize the generated skeletons and skins and perform similar animations on the outputs to better demonstrate the practical usability of each rigged asset. For brevity, we omit TRELLIS ∗+ in the following discussion. In the case of the dragon, which is a relatively simple example with a clear identity and a four-limbed structure, AniGen , UniRig, Puppeteer, and RigAnything generate skeletons that are overall very similar to the ground truth. However, there are notable differences in the details. UniRig generates redundant bones in the head, while Puppeteer and RigAnything fail to produce detailed finger joints. Anymate produces a skeleton with joint distributions very close to the GT, but the connections between bones are incorrect. Regarding skin results, UniRig, Puppeteer, and RigAnything exhibit regional artifacts, particularly in the feet or tail. The flower example is more challenging than the dragon. UniRig and RigAnything fail to generate skeletons that adequately cover the full structure of the flower. In contrast, Anymate produces joints that closely match the GT joint distribution, but some bone connec-tions are incorrect. Puppeteer creates a coarse yet overall suitable skeleton to support the flower, but its skin results are inadequate for practical animation, resulting in broken animations. Some com-pared results also exhibit pose discrepancies after animation. This is not because different target poses are used; instead, all methods are driven toward the same target motion. When a baseline predicts topologically broken bones or erroneous skin influences, it cannot physically realize the target pose without catastrophic distortion, so the final animated pose remains visibly mismatched. 

4.4 In-the-Wild Results 

We present the robust generalization of AniGen on diverse “in-the-wild” images in Fig. 10, including real-world photographs, web-sourced imagery, and AI-generated content. These examples span a diverse set of object categories: sea animals, household items, car-toon characters, pets, humans, birds, plants, and machinery, demon-strating the versatility of our approach across both natural and synthetic visual domains. To highlight the functional utility of the generated assets, we further provide edited poses and motion vari-ants tailored to the identity, structure, and expected behavior of the underlying subject. As illustrated, a whale can be posed to swim freely through an ocean scene; the lamp can be reoriented so its head and body direct light toward different targets; and the cartoon character can be driven through a variety of full-body motions. Like-wise, the dog can open and close its mouth while running across a lawn, the woman can be animated performing kung-fu move-ments, and the eagle can be posed to hug or capture a sheep in a dynamic interaction. Beyond animals and humans, we also demon-strate controllable state changes and functional motions: the plant can transition between blooming and withering, and the robotic arm can grasp an apple, lift it, and transport it to a new location. These diverse results underscore the flexibility and versatility of 

AniGen , demonstrating its capacity to operate effectively and ro-bustly across a wide variety of subjects, visual styles, and real-world scenarios. This breadth suggests that AniGen serves as a unified, category-agnostic foundation for controllable asset synthesis and animation, rather than being confined to narrow context domains. As a result, AniGen enables a wide range of downstream applica-tions, including embodied AI (e.g., interactive agents that require consistent, controllable visual assets), image and video editing (e.g., pose- and motion-aware content modification), animation and gam-ing pipelines (e.g., rapid prototyping of characters, props, and ac-tions), and creative production workflows such as cartoon creation and stylized storytelling. Moreover, it can support immersive and AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 13 

simulation-centric settings, including virtual reality experiences, digital-twin systems, and game character development. Dense Medium Sparse Condition 

> Fig. 11. Skeleton generation with different joint density levels. Higher joint density enables flexible, human-like motions, while medium and sparse den-sities result in reduced flexibility, resembling real robots. This demonstrates the adaptability of the method to varying motion requirements.

4.5 Joint Number Control 

As discussed in Sec. 3.4.2, we introduce joint density as a conditional input to control the number of joints in the generated skeleton, al-lowing it to adapt to varying flexibility requirements. The GT joint count is normalized to the range [0, 1] (by dividing by 60 and clamp-ing), positionally embedded, and encoded with MLPs before being injected into the flow model via AdaLN modulation. During infer-ence, the joint density condition can be adjusted to control the final number of skeleton joints using classifier-free guidance (CFG). We illustrate the results of joint number control in Fig. 11, using a CFG scale of 3.0. By adjusting the joint density, the model can synthesize skeletons with distinct degrees of freedom: a “high-density” can per-form smooth, human-like motions – such as bending arms, twisting its head, and clenching its fists – while a “medium-density” variant retains limb flexibility but loses fine-grained manual dexterity. At the “sparse” extreme, the model yields a rigid, minimalist armature with significantly constrained motion, like a “real robot”. 

4.6 Ablation Study 

In this section, we conduct an ablation study on the design choices discussed in the method section and explain why we selected the current technical approach. First, we investigate the confidence design, as detailed in Sec.3.2.2. High ambiguity in border regions makes confidence learning essential to ensure clean final generation results. Without confidence, the model fails to refine noisy predic-tions into a clean skeleton, as shown in the 3rd column of Fig.12. Even with Bayesian confidence [Kendall and Gal 2017], the self-adaptive learning approach cannot effectively resolve ambiguous regions, resulting in noisy and redundant bones and joints. In con-trast, our method explicitly defines ambiguity in Eq.3 using a prior and supervises the confidence field directly during training, rather than relying on Bayesian learning’s adaptive reconstruction loss. This results in a more effective confidence field, which integrates seamlessly with the confidence-weighted grouping algorithm (Alg.1) to consistently achieve accurate grouping results. The quantitative results in Tab. 4 confirm this trend: explicit confidence supervi-sion improves structural correctness over both removing confidence and replacing it with Bayesian uncertainty learning, while SkinAE pretraining is critical for high-quality skin prediction.               

> Table 4. Quantitative ablation on confidence modeling and SkinAE pretrain-ing. Lower is better for both metrics.
> Method Bayesian w/o-Conf w/o-SkinAE Ours Joint-GW ↓0.310 0.337 0.383 0.286
> Skin-KL ↓3.174 3.187 5.138 2.919

We also analyze the impact of pretraining SkinAE. Without pre-training ("w/o SkinAE"), SkinAE becomes part of the structured latent auto-encoder ( E𝐿 and D𝐿 ) and is trained jointly from scratch. This joint optimization lacks skin information in the input to the structured latent encoder, leading to sub-optimal feature alignment and hindered convergence. Consequently, the reconstruction of the joint field is negatively affected. As shown in the 4th column of Fig. 12, this results in poor skin quality for the tissue character and a broken skeleton for the goat. Our pretraining strategy ensures convergence of the structured latent auto-encoder and achieves sufficient accuracy for the generation decoding task. Skeleton Skin  Skeleton Skin      

> GT Bayesian w/o Conf w/o SkinAE Our s
> Fig. 12. Ablation study on confidence design and SkinAE pretraining. With-out confidence learning or with Bayesian confidence, skeleton predictions are noisy and redundant (column 2,3). Without pretraining SkinAE, skin quality and skeleton structure degrade significantly (column 4). Our method ensures clean skeletons and accurate skin generation (column 5).

5 Conclusion 

We introduced AniGen , a method for image-conditioned generation of animatable 3D assets that couples geometry synthesis with rig prediction in a single generative model. In contrast to “generate-then-rig” pipelines, AniGen learns a joint distribution over shape, 14 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

skeleton, and skin, and represents all three as fields to promote mutual consistency. Our core contribution, the 𝑆 3 field formulation, together with the confidence-decaying nearest joint-parent field and the dual skin feature field, enables reliable modeling of kinematic structure and skinning despite ambiguity and category diversity. 

AniGen leverages a structured latent auto-encoder and flow-based generation over sparse structures and structured latents to produce coherent rigged assets directly from images. Empirically, AniGen 

achieves clear gains over prior approaches in rigging quality and usability, and generalizes well to in-the-wild images spanning a wide range of object categories and visual styles. The revised experi-ments further show that these gains are achieved without materially sacrificing geometry fidelity relative to strong geometry-only gen-erators. We believe that AniGen establishes a powerful foundation for the next generation of controllable 3D content creation, with broad applications for interactive graphics, embodied AI, VR/AR, digital twins, and animation/editing workflows. 

Limitations and future work. One limitation of AniGen is its cur-rent focus on image-conditioned generation. Although effective, this setting does not fully reflect many practical use cases, where animatable shapes are often derived from captured videos in which motion dynamics and skeletal constraints are more explicitly ob-served. Extending AniGen to support video input could enable more robust and temporally consistent shape and skeleton generation, and also enable the production of animatable shapes directly aligned with the motions and structural cues present in the input video. Ad-dressing this challenge is an important direction for future work and could substantially broaden the applicability of the method. A second limitation arises for articulated objects that require strict geometric alignment between rigid parts, such as the lid and base of a laptop. Although AniGen can infer a plausible hinge skeleton for such objects, small geometric mismatches may still produce visible gaps in closed configurations. Finally, the skeletons predicted by our current model primarily reflect the medial-axis tendencies present in the training data, rather than fully anatomically inspired produc-tion rigs. We emphasize that this limitation stems from the available data rather than from the representation itself. Since the proposed 

𝑆 3 fields are continuous and volumetric, they are, in principle, ca-pable of encoding richer sub-surface control structures, including production-style anatomical rigs, given access to suitable data. 

References 

2014. Auto-encoding variational bayes .J. A. Bærentzen, R. Abdrashitov, and K. Singh. 2014. Interactive Shape Modeling using a Skeleton-Mesh Co-Representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH) 33, 4 (2014). Ilya Baran and Jovan Popović. 2007. Automatic rigging and animation of 3d characters. 

ACM Transactions on graphics (TOG) 26, 3 (2007), 72–es. Péter Borosán, Ming Jin, Doug DeCarlo, Yotam Gingold, and Andrew Nealen. 2012. RigMesh: automatic rigging for part-based shape modeling and deformation. ACM Trans. Graph. 31, 6, Article 198 (Nov. 2012), 9 pages. doi:10.1145/2366145.2366217 Honghua Chen, Yushi Lan, Yongwei Chen, and Xingang Pan. 2025a. ArtiLatent: Realistic Articulated 3D Object Generation via Structured Latents. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers . 1–11. Rui Chen, Jianfeng Zhang, Yixun Liang, Guan Luo, Weiyu Li, Jiarui Liu, Xiu Li, Xiaoxiao Long, Jiashi Feng, and Ping Tan. 2025c. Dora: Sampling and benchmarking for 3d shape variational auto-encoders. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 16251–16261. Yiwen Chen, Zhihao Li, Yikai Wang, Hu Zhang, Qin Li, Chi Zhang, and Guosheng Lin. 2025b. Ultra3d: Efficient and high-fidelity 3d generation with part attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17745 (2025). Peng Dai, Feitong Tan, Qiangeng Xu, David Futschik, Ruofei Du, Sean Fanello, XI-AOJUAN QI, and Yinda Zhang. 2025. SVG: 3D Stereoscopic Video Generation via Denoising Frame Matrix. In ICLR .Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al .2023a. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 35799–35813. Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. 2023b. Obja-verse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 13142–13153. Yufan Deng, Yuhao Zhang, Chen Geng, Shangzhe Wu, and Jiajun Wu. 2025. Anymate: A dataset and baselines for learning 3d object rigging. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers . 1–10. Ruiqi Gao, Aleksander Holynski, Philipp Henzler, Arthur Brussee, Ricardo Martin Bru-alla, Pratul Srinivasan, Jonathan Barron, and Ben Poole. 2024. CAT3D: Create Anything in 3D with Multi-View Diffusion Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 75468–75494. Inbar Gat, Sigal Raab, Guy Tevet, Yuval Reshef, Amit Haim Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2025. Anytop: Character animation diffusion with any topology. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers . 1–10. Clark R Givens and Rae Michael Shortt. 1984. A class of Wasserstein metrics for probability distributions. Michigan Mathematical Journal 31, 2 (1984), 231–240. Zhiyang Guo, Ori Zhang, Jax Xiang, Alan Zhao, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. 2025. Make-It-Poseable: Feed-forward Latent Posing Model for 3D Humanoid Character Animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16767 (2025). Xianglong He, Zi-Xin Zou, Chia-Hao Chen, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Chun Yuan, Wanli Ouyang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Yangguang Li. 2025. SparseFlex: High-Resolution and Arbitrary-Topology 3D Shape Modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 14822–14833. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 6840–6851. Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. 2023. LRM: Large Reconstruction Model for Single Image to 3D. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Binbin Huang, Haobin Duan, Yiqun Zhao, Zibo Zhao, Yi Ma, and Shenghua Gao. 2025a. CUPID: Generative 3D Reconstruction via Joint Object and Pose Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20776 (2025). Yi-Hua Huang, Yang-Tian Sun, Ziyi Yang, Xiaoyang Lyu, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xiaojuan Qi. 2024. Sc-gs: Sparse-controlled gaussian splatting for editable dynamic scenes. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .4220–4230. Zehuan Huang, Haoran Feng, Yang-Tian Sun, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. 2025b. Animax: Animating the inanimate in 3d with joint video-pose diffusion models. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers . 1–13. Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. 2022. Zero-shot text-guided object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 867–876. Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. 2017. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 2023. 3D Gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4 (2023), 139–1. Jinhyeok Kim, Jaehun Bang, Seunghyun Seo, and Kyungdon Joo. 2025. Rigidity-Aware 3D Gaussian Deformation from a Single Image. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers . 1–11. Jiahao Li, Hao Tan, Kai Zhang, Zexiang Xu, Fujun Luan, Yinghao Xu, Yicong Hong, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Greg Shakhnarovich, and Sai Bi. 2024. Instant3D: Fast Text-to-3D with Sparse-view Generation and Large Reconstruction Model. In ICLR .Peizhuo Li, Kfir Aberman, Rana Hanocka, Libin Liu, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, and Bao-quan Chen. 2021. Learning Skeletal Articulations with Neural Blend Shapes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021), 130. Ruining Li, Yuxin Yao, Chuanxia Zheng, Christian Rupprecht, Joan Lasenby, Shangzhe Wu, and Andrea Vedaldi. 2025a. Particulate: Feed-Forward 3D Object Articulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11798 (2025). Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Wanli Ouyang, et al . 2025c. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06608 (2025). AniGen: Unified 𝑆 3 Fields for Animatable 3D Asset Generation • 15 

Zhibing Li, Mengchen Zhang, Tong Wu, Jing Tan, Jiaqi Wang, and Dahua Lin. 2025b. SS4D: Native 4D Generative Model via Structured Spacetime Latents. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics (TOG) 44, 6 (2025), 1–12. Isabella Liu, Zhan Xu, Wang Yifan, Hao Tan, Zexiang Xu, Xiaolong Wang, Hao Su, and Zifan Shi. 2025. Riganything: Template-free autoregressive rigging for diverse 3d assets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 44, 4 (2025), 1–12. Lijuan Liu, Youyi Zheng, Di Tang, Yi Yuan, Changjie Fan, and Kun Zhou. 2019. Neu-roskinning: Automatic skin binding for production characters with deep graph networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 38, 4 (2019), 1–12. Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. 2023. Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 9298–9309. Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. 2022. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003 

(2022). Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. 2024. SyncDreamer: Generating Multiview-consistent Images from a Single-view Image. In ICLR .Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. 2021. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision .10012–10022. Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al . 2024. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 9970–9980. Jing Ma and Dongliang Zhang. 2023. TARig: Adaptive template-aware neural rigging for humanoid characters. Computers & Graphics 114 (2023), 158–167. David Marr and Herbert Keith Nishihara. 1978. Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three-dimensional shapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences 200, 1140 (1978), 269–294. Facundo Mémoli. 2011. Gromov–Wasserstein distances and the metric approach to object matching. Foundations of computational mathematics 11, 4 (2011), 417–487. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM 65, 1 (2021), 99–106. Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al . 2024. DINOv2: Learning Robust Visual Features without Supervision. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research Journal (2024). Karran Pandey, J. Andreas Bærentzen, and Karan Singh. 2022. Face Extrusion Quad Meshes. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings (Vancouver, BC, Canada) 

(SIGGRAPH ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 10, 9 pages. doi:10.1145/3528233.3530754 William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 4195–4205. Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. 2023. DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion. In ICLR .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al . 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning . PmLR, 8748–8763. Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Jiaxiang Tang, Chi Zhang, Ang Cao, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. 2023. Dreamgaussian4d: Generative 4d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17142 (2023). Tianchang Shen, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Kangxue Yin, Zian Wang, Wenzheng Chen, Zan Gojcic, Sanja Fidler, Nicholas Sharp, and Jun Gao. 2023. Flexible isosurface extraction for gradient-based mesh optimization. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42, 4 (2023), 1–16. Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. 2023. MV-Dream: Multi-view Diffusion for 3D Generation. In ICLR .Chaoyue Song, Xiu Li, Fan Yang, Zhongcong Xu, Jiacheng Wei, Fayao Liu, Jiashi Feng, Guosheng Lin, and Jianfeng Zhang. 2025a. Puppeteer: Rig and Animate Your 3D Models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Chaoyue Song, Jianfeng Zhang, Xiu Li, Fan Yang, Yiwen Chen, Zhongcong Xu, Jun Hao Liew, Xiaoyang Guo, Fayao Liu, Jiashi Feng, and Guosheng Lin. 2025b. MagicAr-ticulate: Make Your 3D Models Articulation-Ready. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) . 15998–16007. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. 2021. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. In ICLR .Mingze Sun, Junhao Chen, Junting Dong, Yurun Chen, Xinyu Jiang, Shiwei Mao, Puhua Jiang, Jingbo Wang, Bo Dai, and Ruqi Huang. 2025. Drive: Diffusion-based rigging empowers generation of versatile and expressive characters. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 21170–21180. Jiaxiang Tang, Zhaoxi Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Tengfei Wang, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. 2024. Lgm: Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 1–18. Dmitry Tochilkin, David Pankratz, Zexiang Liu, Zixuan Huang, , Adam Letts, Yangguang Li, Ding Liang, Christian Laforte, Varun Jampani, and Yan-Pei Cao. 2024. TripoSR: Fast 3D Object Reconstruction from a Single Image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02151 

(2024). Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). Haoyu Wang, Shaoli Huang, Fang Zhao, Chun Yuan, and Ying Shan. 2023a. Hmc: Hierarchical mesh coarsening for skeleton-free motion retargeting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10941 (2023). Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2023b. Prolificdreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023), 8406–8441. Rundi Wu, Ruiqi Gao, Ben Poole, Alex Trevithick, Changxi Zheng, Jonathan T Barron, and Aleksander Holynski. 2025a. Cat4d: Create anything in 4d with multi-view video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 26057–26068. Shuang Wu, Youtian Lin, Feihu Zhang, Yifei Zeng, Jingxi Xu, Philip Torr, Xun Cao, and Yao Yao. 2024a. Direct3d: Scalable image-to-3d generation via 3d latent diffusion transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 121859– 121881. Zijie Wu, Chaohui Yu, Yanqin Jiang, Chenjie Cao, Fan Wang, and Xiang Bai. 2024b. Sc4d: Sparse-controlled video-to-4d generation and motion transfer. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 361–379. Zijie Wu, Chaohui Yu, Fan Wang, and Xiang Bai. 2025b. AnimateAnyMesh: A Feed-Forward 4D Foundation Model for Text-Driven Universal Mesh Animation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .13557–13568. Jianfeng Xiang, Xiaoxue Chen, Sicheng Xu, Ruicheng Wang, Zelong Lv, Yu Deng, Hongyuan Zhu, Yue Dong, Hao Zhao, Nicholas Jing Yuan, et al . 2025a. Native and Compact Structured Latents for 3D Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14692 

(2025). Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. 2025b. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 21469–21480. Tianyi Xie, Yunuo Chen, Yaowei Guo, Yin Yang, Bolei Zhou, Demetri Terzopoulos, Ying Jiang, and Chenfanfu Jiang. 2025. AnimaMimic: Imitating 3D Animation from Video Priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14133 (2025). Yinghao Xu, Hao Tan, Fujun Luan, Sai Bi, Peng Wang, Jiahao Li, Zifan Shi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Gordon Wetzstein, Zexiang Xu, et al . 2024. DMV3D: Denoising Multi-view Diffusion Using 3D Large Reconstruction Model. In ICLR .Zhan Xu, Yang Zhou, Evangelos Kalogerakis, Chris Landreth, and Karan Singh. 2020. RigNet: neural rigging for articulated characters. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39, 4 (2020), 58–1. Zhan Xu, Yang Zhou, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Karan Singh. 2019. Predicting Ani-mation Skeletons for 3D Articulated Models via Volumetric Nets. 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) (2019), 298–307. https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:201309034 Zhan Xu, Yang Zhou, Li Yi, and Evangelos Kalogerakis. 2022. Morig: Motion-aware rigging of character meshes from point clouds. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 conference papers . 1–9. Jiawei Yang, Tianhong Li, Lijie Fan, Yonglong Tian, and Yue Wang. 2025. Latent denoising makes good visual tokenizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15856 (2025). Jingfeng Yao, Yuda Song, Yucong Zhou, and Xinggang Wang. 2025. Towards Scalable Pre-training of Visual Tokenizers for Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13687 

(2025). Xin Yu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yangguang Li, Ding Liang, Song-Hai Zhang, and Xiaojuan Qi. 2023. Text-to-3D with Classifier Score Distillation. In ICLR .Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Niessner, and Peter Wonka. 2023. 3dshape2vecset: A 3d shape representation for neural fields and generative diffusion models. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) 42, 4 (2023), 1–16. Jia-Peng Zhang, Cheng-Feng Pu, Meng-Hao Guo, Yan-Pei Cao, and Shi-Min Hu. 2025. One model to rig them all: Diverse skeleton rigging with unirig. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 44, 4 (2025), 1–18. Jia-Qi Zhang, Miao Wang, Fu-Cheng Zhang, and Fang-Lue Zhang. 2024a. Skinned motion retargeting with preservation of body part relationships. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2024). Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. 2024b. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d assets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 43, 4 (2024), 1–20. 16 • Yi-Hua Huang, et al. 

Zi-Xin Zou, Zhipeng Yu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yangguang Li, Ding Liang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Song-Hai Zhang. 2024. Triplane meets gaussian splatting: Fast and generalizable single-view 3d reconstruction with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 10324–10335.