Title: Pair2Scene: Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11808v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 02:51:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Pair2Scene: Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Xingjian Ran 1 Shujie Zhang 2 Weipeng Zhong 3 Li Luo 1 4 Bo Dai 1

Project Page DiffuScene FactoredScenes Ours (Pair2Scene)   

> 3D-Front
> Open-vocabulary
> Infinigen-Indoors HoloDeck Ours (Pair2Scene) LayoutVLM
> ATISS

Figure 1. Scene Generation Results. (Top) When trained solely on curated 3D-Front data (avg. 4.07 objects for bedroom), learning-based methods remain confined to its limited distribution. In contrast, Pair2Scene beyond dataset distribution by leveraging local object relations to procedurally generate more complex scenes. (Bottom) When trained on full proposed 3D-Pairs dataset, Pair2Scene maintains superior spatial logic over procedural or LLM-based baselines, producing richer, more realistic environments. 

## Abstract 

Generating high-fidelity 3D indoor scenes re-mains a significant challenge due to data scarcity and the complexity of modeling intricate spatial relations. Current methods often struggle to scale beyond training distribution to dense scenes or rely on LLMs/VLMs that lack the ability for pre-cise spatial reasoning. Building on top of the observation that object placement relies mainly on local dependencies instead of information-redundant global distributions, in this paper, we propose Pair2Scene , a novel procedural genera-tion framework that integrates learned local rules with scene hierarchies and physics-based algo-rithms. These rules mainly capture two types of inter-object relations, namely support relations 

that follow physical hierarchies, and functional re-lations that reflect semantic links. We model these rules through a network, which estimates spatial 

> 1

The University of Hong Kong 2Tsinghua University 3Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4Shenzhen Loop Area Institute. Correspon-dence to: Bo Dai <bdai@hku.hk >.

Preprint. April 14, 2026. 

position distributions of dependent objects con-ditioned on position and geometry of the anchor ones. Accordingly, we curate a dataset 3D-Pairs 

from existing scene data to train the model. Dur-ing inference, our framework can generate scenes by recursively applying our model within a hi-erarchical structure, leveraging collision-aware rejection sampling to align local rules into coher-ent global layouts. Extensive experiments demon-strate that our framework outperforms existing methods in generating complex environments that go beyond training data while maintaining physi-cal and semantic plausibility. 

## 1. Introduction 

The generation of high-fidelity, realistic 3D scenes is funda-mental to the advancement of the game industry, embodied AI, virtual reality, and film production. Indoor 3D scenes are essentially composed of individual object entities and their spatial layouts, and recent advancements (Zhang et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025; Lai et al., 2025) in generative modeling have already driven a rapid surge in the quality of object-level generation. However, realistic layout generation remains a significant bottleneck, where 1

> arXiv:2604.11808v1 [cs.CV] 13 Apr 2026 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation

one of the primary challenges lies in the effective modeling and generating complex scenes. This challenge is rooted in a systemic data deficiency. Existing synthetic datasets (Fu et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2025) are often limited in complex-ity, focusing on specific domains, like large furniture or tabletops. Meanwhile, real-to-sim datasets (Zhong et al., 2025) suffer from noisy data distribution. Consequently, neither source can fully support the end-to-end training of models for generating complex and diverse scenes. Given these difficulties, the problem of how to efficiently represent the intricate relations in global scenes is critical, yet largely underexplored. Beyond the data hurdles, existing approaches also face struc-tural limitations in modeling complex scene distributions. Existing learning-based methods (Paschalidou et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024a; Tang et al., 2024; Lin & Mu, 2024; Zhai et al., 2024) mainly rely on end-to-end training within a single dataset. Although these methods effectively capture the dataset’s distribution, there are two primary limitations. First, the generative capacity of the model is inherently capped by the complexity of the training data, hindering its ability to synthesize novel or more intricate environ-ments. Second, as the number of objects increases, the complexity of modeling the joint distribution rises dispro-portionately. Since every object is often treated as globally dependent on all others, the interaction between objects be-comes increasingly difficult to learn. An alternative research thrust attempts to leverage the vast commonsense knowl-edge of language models to reason about scene layouts. While LLM/VLM-guided approaches (Zhou et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Aguina-Kang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2025) can produce diverse and semantically rich scenes, they are constrained by the limited spatial reasoning capabilities, often resulting in layouts that lack physical or semantic plausibility. In this paper, we raise a question: Is it truly necessary to model the global distribution of an entire scene? We argue that the complexity of scene modeling can be significantly mitigated by rethinking the scope of object interactions . To this end, we propose Pair2Scene , a framework grounded in the observation that the placement of any given entity in a dense indoor environment is typically governed by only a small subset of proximal neighbors rather than the en-tire global context. By modeling local rules, which are more abundant and consistent across datasets, this decom-position effectively addresses data scarcity and facilitates seamless joint training. To formalize local rules, we define two primary categories of inter-object relations: support relations, which characterize the physical support dictated by gravity, and functional relations, which describe spatial distributions influenced by the semantic and functional links between two objects. Based on these definitions, we build a data curation pipeline that aggregates local rules from multiple sources to construct our 3D-Pairs dataset. Using object point clouds as input, our model learns the spatial distribution of object relations, thereby bridging the gap between fine-grained asset geometry and spatial distribution. Furthermore, to achieve global consistency and physical plausibility, Pair2Scene combines scene hierarchies, local layout learning, and physics-based algorithms to execute lo-cal distributions in a structured sequence while maintaining awareness of the overall scene configuration. This design effectively simulates a global spatial distribution, allowing Pair2Scene to surpass training data constraints and generate scenes of significantly higher complexity than the original data. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce Pair2Scene that leverages point cloud to learn and predict local spatial distributions, incorporat-ing asset geometry into the placement. By strategically combining local rule learning with scene hierarchies and physics-based algorithms, our framework achieves scalability and alleviates data scarcity by extracting abundant local rules from diverse sources. • We formally define a set of object relations as the foundation for local rules, encompassing support hi-erarchies and functional links. To support this repre-sentation, we develop a robust data curation pipeline, culminating in the 3D-Pairs dataset, which contains approximately 140,000 relation tuples. • Extensive experiments show that Pair2Scene generates complex scenes with higher quality than existing meth-ods in both physical plausibility and semantic align-ment, and demonstrates the ability to generalize to out-of-distribution scenes, producing layouts of higher complexity than those in training data. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Learning-based Scene Generation 

Learning-based methods (Feng et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2025b; Ran et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025) mainly focus on modeling scene distributions directly from scene datasets, typically treating scene synthesis as a sequence generation task. Among these, ATISS (Paschalidou et al., 2021) utilizes a Transformer-based model to achieve scene completion and generation by predicting object attributes. DiffuScene (Tang et al., 2024) introduces denoising diffusion models to the spatial domain, enhancing generation quality through iter-ative refinement in the object attribute space. To improve interactivity, InstructScene (Lin & Mu, 2024) enables local editing and arrangement via natural language instructions. Recent works like FactoredScene (Hsu et al., 2025) employ program-based representations to learn procedural libraries for scene construction. Furthermore, LayoutVLM (Sun 2Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

et al., 2025a) leverages multimodal alignment to enhance spatial reasoning through vision-language semantics. De-spite their success in capturing the distribution of datasets, the generative capacity of these models is strictly bounded by the diversity of the training samples, and they struggle to scale as the object count rises, since the inter-object depen-dencies become increasingly intractable to model. 

2.2. LLM/VLM-based Scene Generation 

Other works (Fu et al., 2024; Aguina-Kang et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2025) utilize zero-shot reasoning and broad com-monsense knowledge of LLMs/VLMs to bypass the require-ment for extensive scene-specific training. GALA3D (Zhou et al., 2024) utilizes LLMs to generate initial layouts cou-pled with object-scene compositional optimization for multi-object generation. I-Design ( C¸ elen et al., 2024) focuses on interactive design, integrating user preferences with gener-ative models for real-time, incremental scene construction. HoloDeck (Yang et al., 2024b) generates detailed layout schemes via LLMs to create high-quality environments suit-able for robotics simulation. Additionally, HSM (Pun et al., 2025) introduces a hierarchical scene model that organizes generation from room architecture to furniture groups to im-prove structural logic. While these approaches offer signifi-cant flexibility and semantic diversity, they predominantly rely on holistic scene modeling. This global perspective cre-ates a reasoning bottleneck as scene complexity increases. The inherent spatial limitations of language models make it increasingly difficult to provide precise guidance for high-density environments. 

## 3. Method 

3.1. Problem Formulation 

We define a 3D scene S = {O 1, O2, . . . , ON } as a struc-tured collection of objects. Each object Oi is characterized by its geometric asset Ai and its oriented bounding box 

Bi = {ci, si, ri}, where ci ∈ R3 denotes the center coordi-nates, si ∈ R3 the dimensions, and ri ∈ R6 the continuous rotation representation (Zhou et al., 2019). 3.1.1. O BJECT RELATIONS AND SCENE SEQUENCE 

To manage the complexity of dense environments, we de-compose the scene into a sequence of local object interac-tions. To formalize these local rules, we define two primary relational archetypes that govern the spatial and semantic configuration of the scene: 

Support Relation ( Rs): Grounded in physical plausibility, this relation identifies an anchor object as the supporting surface (e.g., a table) that provides gravitational stability to a dependent object (e.g., a laptop). 

Functional Relation ( Rf ): This characterizes the seman-tic proximity between entities sharing a common surface, where the dependent object’s placement is conditioned by its functional utility relative to an anchor (e.g., a keyboard placed relative to a laptop). Based on these relations, a global scene is represented as an ordered sequence of relational tuples S = {T 1, T2, . . . , TN }.Each tuple Ti is formulated as: 

Ti = ⟨O dep,i , Osup,i , {O f nc,i }opt ⟩, (1) where Odep,i is the object to be generated, Osup,i is the mandatory support anchor, and Of nc,i is an optional func-tional anchor. To ensure a valid generative dependency, the sequence must maintain causality: for any i-th tuple, the anchor objects (Osup,i and Of nc,i ) must either be the floor or have been previously instantiated as a dependent object Odep,j in the sequence where j < i . This ordering ensures that the spatial context for every dependent object is fully defined prior to its placement. 3.1.2. P ROBABILISTIC SPATIAL MODELING 

Following the sequential decomposition defined above, our objective is to model the conditional probability 

P (Bdep,i |A dep,i , Osup,i , {O f nc,i }opt ) for each relational tuple Ti. This distribution captures the spatial rules of the de-pendent object relative to the geometric and spatial features of its anchors. Given the inherent multi-modality of object placement, where a single functional or support context might allow for several valid positions (e.g., a chair positioned at different orientations around a desk), we adopt a Mixture of Logistics (MoL) to represent the density function, which is similar to previous works (van den Oord et al., 2016; Salimans et al., 2017; Paschalidou et al., 2021). The model outputs a set of parameters Θ = {πk, μ k, s k}Kk=1 for K mixture components. The probability density for the bounding box parameters Bdep ∈ R12 is formulated as a weighted sum of 

K logistic components: 

P (Bdep |Θ) = 

> K

X

> k=1

πk

> 12

Y

> d=1

L(Bdep,d |μk,d , s k,d ), (2) where πk represents the mixing coefficient, μk ∈ R12 the mean vector, sk ∈ R12 the scale parameter for the k-th com-ponent, and L(· | μ, s ) denotes the logistic distribution with location parameter μ and scale parameter s. By sampling from this learned multi-modal distribution, our framework can generate diverse yet physically and semantically consis-tent object placements within the scene sequence. 3Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation place 

> Point Cloud Encoder
> Bbox Encoder

# … MLP Head 

> Relational Self-Attention
> Geometry-Aware Cross-Attention
> Feed-Forward Network
> MoL Distribution
> Geometry-Aware Layout Predictor
> Learnable Query Tokens

Figure 2. Architecture of Pair2Scene Model. The pipeline processes the dependent asset Adep and anchor objects (support Osup 

and functional Of nc ) to predict the spatial distribution of the dependent object. Point cloud encoders extract latent geometric features 

zgeo , while the bounding box encoder transforms spatial configurations into embeddings ebbox . These are processed through cascaded Transformer-like blocks consisting of Relational Self-Attention, which captures global relations using learnable query tokens xm, and Geometry-Aware Cross-Attention for fine-grained geometric reasoning. Finally, the MLP head outputs the parameters for a MoL distribution, providing a multi-modal probabilistic framework for object placement. 

3.2. Learning Object Relations 

Taking the dependent asset and the anchor assets alongside their layout as input, our model predicts the parameters of a Mixture of Logistics distribution as the probability density function for the dependent object’s bounding box. 3.2.1. G EOMETRIC FEATURE ENCODING 

Accurate spatial distribution modeling requires a fine-grained understanding of object geometry. Relying solely on semantic categories is insufficient for two primary rea-sons: first, support surfaces are often non-planar or do not coincide with the top face of a bounding box; second, it is inherently difficult to normalize the initial orientations across diverse objects. To this end, we employ Point-MAE (Pang et al., 2022) as the geometric encoder, pretrained on the 3D asset library ag-gregated from the datasets in this work, to extract geometric features. For a given object, the encoder processes its point cloud to generate geometric features zgeo m = Encoder (Am).By integrating these features, our model perceives the phys-ical affordances and orientation of the objects, enabling the model to predict precise placements. 3.2.2. G EOMETRY -A WARE LAYOUT PREDICTOR 

Geometry-Aware Layout Predictor, as illustrated in Fig. 2, fuses learnable latent queries with dense geometric features through a sequence of Transformer-like blocks (Vaswani et al., 2017). Each object m ∈ { dep, sup, f nc } within a relational tuple is initially represented by a learnable query token xm ∈ Rd, and we denote the set of all such tokens as X = {xm}m. For anchors, we incorporate their known spatial configurations by encoding the bounding box pa-rameters Bm via an MLP to produce a spatial positional embedding ebbox m = MLP pos (Bm) ∈ Rd (collectively de-noted as Ebbox ). The core of the architecture consists of N

cascaded Transformer-like blocks. 

Relational Self-Attention. Within each block, Relational Self-Attention layer captures the global relations between the dependent object and its anchors. By integrating the spatial embedding ebbox m into the key and value for anchors, the model enables the dependent to attend to the spatial presence of its anchors: 

X = SelfAttn (X, X + Ebbox , X + Ebbox ). (3) 

Geometry-Aware Cross-Attention. To capture geometric information, Geometry-Aware Cross-Attention layer attends to zgeo m extracted from Point-MAE. Each token xm performs the cross-attention operation exclusively on its own corre-sponding geometric features: 

xm = CrossAttn (xm, zgeo m , zgeo m ). (4) The tokens are then processed by a standard Feed-Forward Network (FFN) with residual connections and layer normal-ization to update the hidden states X.Finally, the refined latent representation of the dependent ob-ject xdep is mapped through an output MLP head to predict the parameters ˆΘ of the MoL distribution: 

ˆΘ = MLP out (xdep ). (5) This distribution provides a multi-modal probabilistic frame-work for sampling the final predicted bounding box Bdep .3.2.3. T RAINING OBJECTIVE 

Our model is trained to maximize the log-likelihood of the ground-truth bounding box parameters Bdep under the 4Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation Base Template 

> Bedroom: Bed, Stand Workstation: Table …

## 🔍        

> Floor
> Book-shelf Table Chair
> Laptop
> Desk Lamp
> Key-board
> Support Tree
> Floor
> Book-shelf
> Table
> Chair
> Table
> Key-board
> Laptop
> Desk Lamp
> Functional Trees
> Ordered Relation Sequence
> <Table, Floor> ✔
> <Bookshelf, Floor, Table> ✔
> <Chair, Floor, Table> ✔
> <Laptop, Table> ✔
> <Keyboard, Table, Laptop> ✔
> <Desk Lamp, Table, Laptop>
> A simple workstation
> or
> 3D-Pairs Dataset
> Update

Pair2Scene 

> Rejection Sampling
> Retrieve

Figure 3. Scene Assembly Pipeline. The framework parses text or room type into support and functional Trees, serialized as an ordered relation sequence. The Pair2Scene model then predicts spatial distributions based on these relations. Finally, rejection sampling resolves global collisions to produce the final 3D scene. 

predicted MoL distribution. Specifically, we minimize the Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) loss function. For a target bounding box Bdep ∈ R12 , the NLL loss Lnll is formulated as: 

Lnll = − log 

> K

X

> k=1

ˆπk

> 12

Y

> d=1

L(Bdep,d |ˆμk,d , ˆsk,d ). (6) To prevent the model from collapsing and to encourage exploration of the multi-modal distribution space, we intro-duce an entropy regularization term Lent . This term rewards higher entropy in the mixing coefficients π:

Lent =

> K

X

> k=1

ˆπk log ˆ πk. (7) The total training objective Ltotal is defined as a weighted combination of the NLL loss and the entropy regularization term, governed by the hyperparameter λ:

Ltotal = Lnll + λLent . (8) 

3.3. Procedural Scene Assembly 

To obtain a global scene from learned local rules, we repre-sent the scene structure as a hierarchy of relations, which are subsequently serialized into an ordered sequence of relational tuples S = {T 1, T2, . . . , TN }. By procedurally querying Pair2Scene model and employing rejection sam-pling, we resolve global spatial conflicts while maintaining physical plausibility (detailed in Alg. 2 and Fig. 3). 3.3.1. R ELATIONAL HIERARCHIES 

To derive the generative sequence S, we represent the global scene structure through two interconnected hierarchical structures that define the order of placement. 

Support Tree ( Ts): This tree represents the global ground-ing hierarchy. The root node represents the floor, and each directed edge (Oi, Oj ) indicates that Oi serves as the sup-port anchor for Oj .

Functional Tree ( Tf ): For every non-leaf node in Ts, we define a functional tree. This structure captures the semantic dependencies of all objects sharing the same supporting surface. In this hierarchy, an edge indicates that the parent serves as the functional anchor for its child, while the root of Tf remains the common support anchor defined in Ts.To generate these trees, we offer two options: statistical synthesis, which utilizes occurrence frequencies and co-occurrence probabilities derived from our curated dataset to procedurally expand nodes (Alg. 1), and LLM-guided gener-ation, which leverages the structural reasoning capabilities of LLM to design complex, commonsense-compliant scene hierarchies from text descriptions (see Appendix G). 3.3.2. O RDERED RELATION SERIALIZATION 

To transform these hierarchies into a generative sequence, we perform a hybrid traversal. We first traverse the Support Tree Ts using Breadth-First Search (BFS) to ensure that sup-porting surfaces (e.g., a table) are placed before the objects they support (e.g., a laptop). For each node encountered, we then perform a Depth-First Search (DFS) on its associated Functional Tree Tf . This process yields a sequence of tu-ples S, ensuring that every anchor is instantiated before it is used to condition the placement of a dependent object. 3.3.3. C OLLISION -A WARE REJECTION SAMPLING 

While the layout predictor effectively captures local condi-tional densities, it lacks global awareness of objects outside the relational tuple. To account for global occupancy and 5Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation Functional Distillation Synthetic Data     

> Real-to-Sim Data
> 3D-Pair Dataset
> Physical Validation
> If displacement > threshold: ❌
> Support Extraction
> floor sofa
> sofa pillow
> stand serves as storage space bedside bed
> Distance Check
> support anchor functional anchor
> dependent object
> ①
> ②
> ③
> ④

Data Curation 

Figure 4. Data Curation Pipeline. Our data curation workflow involves Physical Validation to filter unstable objects, Support Extraction to identify support dependencies, and LLM-Driven Functional Distillation to extract functional relations. This process results in the 3D-Pair Dataset, which captures fine-grained object interactions. 

prevent inter-object collisions, we define the target distribu-tion pglobal (x) as a truncated version of the model’s predicted distribution plocal (x):

pglobal (x) = 

( plocal (x) 

> Z

, x ∈ F 

0, x / ∈ F , (9) where F denotes the set of physically feasible configurations (non-colliding states) within the current scene, and Z =R 

> F

pglobal (x)dx is the normalization constant. We approximate sampling from pglobal (x) via rejection sam-pling: we draw candidates from the predicted MoL dis-tribution and discard those that result in collisions with placed assets or scene boundaries. Following a successful candidate, a brief gravity simulation is applied to refine placement. This mechanism effectively transforms local conditional predictions into a global scene configuration. 

3.4. Data Curation 

To support the learning of local rules, we develop a data cu-ration pipeline that transforms global scene layouts from di-verse datasets into the relational tuples Ti defined in Sec. 3.1. To construct a high-quality dataset of these local rules, we extract and refine data from 3D-Front (Fu et al., 2021), MesaTask (Hao et al., 2025), and the Real-to-Sim subset of InternScenes (Zhong et al., 2025). As shown in Fig. 4, our pipeline consists of three critical stages: 

Physical Validation and Filtering. Given the inherent noise in large-scale scene datasets, particularly those gen-erated through automated real-to-sim pipelines, we subject all scenes to a rigid-body physics simulation. By applying gravity and resolving initial collisions, we filter out unstable entities and optimize the final layout. Objects that exhibit significant displacement during simulation are discarded, ensuring that the layout is anchored in physical reality. 

Heuristic Support Extraction. We identify Rs pairs using a geometry-based heuristic. For any two proximal objects, we evaluate whether the lower object’s bounding box pro-vides a stable base or whether it contains the upper object’s bounding box. A support relation is established if the verti-cal proximity and horizontal containment exceed a defined threshold. Furthermore, to preserve the consistent distri-bution of large furniture in 3D-Front and mitigate issues arising from the noisy nature and inconsistent scaling of the InternScenes Real-to-Sim subset, we exclude data samples where the floor serves as the only anchor. 

LLM-Driven Functional Distillation. For objects co-located on a shared surface, we leverage the commonsense knowledge and reasoning abilities of LLM (Google, 2025) to discern functional relations. The LLM identifies potential 

Rf pairs and suggests a proximity factor k, which repre-sents the expected interaction range. We validate these pairs by expanding the anchor object’s bounding box by kf . A functional relation is only archived if the dependent ob-ject’s centroid remains within this expanded volume. This approach combines the reasoning of LLM with strict geo-metric verification to produce clean and rich relation pairs. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setup Evaluation Setup. To assess the performance, we define two evaluation settings. The first is the 3D-Front only setting , which evaluates the model’s ability to fit the distri-bution of a dataset and generalize beyond this distribution. In this setting, we train and evaluate exclusively on the cu-rated 3D-Front dataset and compare against learning-based baselines including ATISS (Paschalidou et al., 2021), Dif-fuScene (Tang et al., 2024), LayoutVLM (Sun et al., 2025a), and FactoredScenes (Hsu et al., 2025). We provide two vari-ants of our model: Ours-Fit , which constrains object counts to match the dataset average to show fitting capability, and 

Ours-Beyond , which allows for unconstrained expansion to test the generation of scenes with complexity exceeding the 6Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation DiffuScene LayoutVLM FactoredScenes Ours-Fit ATISS Ours-Beyond 

Figure 5. Qualitative comparison under the 3D-Front only setting. Holodeck LayoutVLM FactoredScenes Infinigen-Indoors Ours 

Figure 6. Qualitative comparison under the multi-source setting. 

Table 1. Comparison of FID and KID on the 3D-Front only setting.                                                

> Method FID ↓KID ( ×1e−3)↓Objects ATISS 71.24 ±1.55 42.18 ±1.42 7.65 DiffuScene 67.45 ±0.92 31.72 ±1.08 6.75 LayoutVLM 120.87 ±2.05 138.54 ±3.12 -FactoredScenes 104.12 ±2.78 129.45 ±2.64 8.53 Ours-Fit 65.92 ±1.14 22.14 ±0.85 6.98 Ours-Beyond 75.88 ±1.22 69.05 ±1.58 14.15

training distribution. The second is the multi-source set-ting , which assesses the capacity for high-complexity scene generation. We train on full 3D-Pairs (see Appendix B) and compare Pair2Scene against procedural and LLM-based frameworks, including Infinigen-Indoors (Raistrick et al., 2024), Holodeck (Yang et al., 2024b), LayoutVLM, and FactoredScenes, which have demonstrated capabilities in generating detailed scenes. 

Metrics. Regarding the evaluation metrics, for the 3D-Front only setting, we quantify generation quality using Fr ´echet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and Kernel Inception Distance (KID) (Bi ´nkowski et al., 2018) calculated from Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) renders of 200 gen-erated scenes following the protocol of DiffuScene (Tang et al., 2024). These metrics measure the similarity and distribution alignment between generated and real scenes. 

Table 2. User study results on the 3D-Front only setting. 

Method SA ↑ PP ↑ SC ↑ MQ ↑ CFS ↑

ATISS 3.14 3.27 2.27 3.21 1.21 DiffuScene 4.45 4.14 2.86 4.30 2.05 FactoredScenes 1.73 2.27 2.82 2.00 0.94 LayoutVLM 2.27 2.14 3.91 2.21 1.44 Ours-Fit 4.18 4.18 3.91 4.18 2.73 Ours-Beyond 5.23 5.00 5.23 5.12 4.46 

Furthermore, we conduct a user study on both settings with 22 participants to evaluate the scenes across three qual-itative criteria: (1) Semantic Alignment (SA), assessing if the layout aligns with human commonsense; (2) Phys-ical Plausibility (PP), evaluating the absence of artifacts like floating objects or collisions; and (3) Scene Complex-ity (SC), measuring the richness and functional density of the scene. Participants rank the methods from best to worst. We report a score for each metric, calculated as P(F requency × W eight )/T otalSamples , where the weight for rank r is defined as N − r + 1 . Finally, we report two holistic measures: Mean Quality (MQ), the average of SA and PP; and the Contextual Fidelity Score (CFS), which weights MQ by the relative Scene Complexity to reflect overall scene quality in context. 7Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation                                      

> Table 3. User study results on the multi-source setting.
> Method SA ↑PP ↑SC ↑MQ ↑CFS ↑
> FactoredScenes 1.50 2.05 1.91 1.78 0.68 Holodeck 3.36 3.59 2.09 3.48 1.45 Infinigen-Indoors 2.50 2.73 3.09 2.62 1.62 LayoutVLM 3.09 2.32 3.18 2.71 1.72 Ours 4.55 4.32 4.73 4.44 4.20
> Table 4. Ablation study results on the 3D-Front only setting.

Variant FID ↓ KID ( ×1e−3) ↓

w/o relation 92.34 82.74 w/o pretrain 81.14 73.91 w/o rejection 78.26 68.56 Class-only 68.45 35.23 w/o gravity 66.82 28.48 Full 65.15 22.32 

4.2. Fitting and Extrapolation on 3D-Front 

The 3D-Front only setting evaluates the model’s capacity to capture the distribution of the dataset while testing its ability to surpass the complexity limits of the dataset. As shown in Table 1, Ours-Fit variant achieves the best performance, outperforming established learning-based methods. This indicates that our local rule modeling more accurately rep-resents the spatial distributions of indoor scenes compared to global layout predictors, such as ATISS and DiffuScene. These quantitative gains are further corroborated by the user study results in Table 2. While baselines remain confined to the limited object density of the training set, Ours-Beyond 

variant leverages the procedural nature of the framework to expand the scene, achieving a superior Scene Complexity score. As evidenced by the high Semantic Alignment and Physical Plausibility scores, this increase in density does not compromise layout logic. As shown in Fig. 1 and 5, while other methods struggle to scale, our method generates spatially coherent and semantically plausible extensions that go beyond the original dataset’s distribution, reflected in our dominant Contextual Fidelity Score. 

4.3. Hierarchical Scene Generation on 3D-Pairs 

Training on the full 3D-Pairs enables Pair2Scene to gen-erate complex scenes that integrate large furniture with fine-grained arrangements. As reflected in Table 3, Fig. 1 (Bottom) and Fig. 6, our approach consistently surpasses all baselines. While LayoutVLM and FactoredScenes often suf-fer from floating artifacts or collisions as object density in-creases, Pair2Scene maintains superior semantic alignment and physical plausibility. Furthermore, unlike procedural and LLM-based baselines such as Infinigen-Indoors and Holodeck, which often produce sparse or semantically dis-connected layouts, our method generates rich environments Class-only w/o pretrain w/o relation 

w/o gravity Full w/o rejection  

> Figure 7. Qualitative ablation study on the multi-source setting.

where objects are logically grounded. This is evidenced by our significantly higher scores in Scene Complexity and Se-mantic Alignment, where human evaluators find our layouts more functionally dense and consistent with commonsense. Overall, our framework excels in balancing intricate detail with overall scene coherence, achieving the highest Contex-tual Fidelity Score among all methods. 

4.4. Ablation Study 

We ablate key designs of Pair2Scene on both settings to verify their contributions as shown in Fig. 7 and Table 4. Specifically, we evaluate: (1) w/o relation , using global co-ordinate regression instead of local rules; (2) w/o pretrain ,training the Point-MAE from scratch; (3) Class-only , replac-ing point cloud inputs with category embeddings; (4) w/o rejection , disabling the rejection sampling mechanism and using the initial raw samples; and (5) w/o gravity , removing the physics-based gravity simulation. 

Impact of Pretraining. The gap between w/o pretrain and our full model highlights that geometric features from our integrated asset library are crucial for the layout predictor to accurately perceive object scale and shape. 

Relational vs. Global Modeling. The w/o relation variant shows the sharpest performance drop, proving that regress-ing global layout underperforms compared to our local rules modeling, which effectively captures spatial relations. 

Geometric Priors vs. Semantic Labels. Compared to 

Class-only , although our model shows marginal gains in FID/KID, metrics mainly sensitive to top-down distributions, the visual results in Fig. 7 reveal underlying issues regarding physical plausibility. By incorporating geometric priors, our model ensures more stable interactions. 

Effectiveness of Rejection Sampling. The performance 8Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

degradation in the w/o rejection variant (Table 4) demon-strates the necessity of our sampling strategy. Without it, the model often produces severe object interpenetrations and fails to align with the global scene distribution, as it lacks the awareness of the current scene configurations. 

Role of Gravity Simulation. While the w/o gravity variant shows relatively stable performance in FID and KID, visual inspection in Fig. 7 reveals its limitations. Without gravity simulation, the model struggles with imprecise contact sur-faces, often resulting in floating objects or unstable support relations. Our full model ensures more realistic physical affordance. 

## 5. Conclusion 

This paper presents Pair2Scene, a relational framework ad-dressing scalability and data scarcity in 3D indoor scene generation. By decomposing global synthesis into localized procedural rules, our approach captures complex spatial distributions more effectively than existing global methods. Leveraging 3D-Pairs and a Geometry-Aware Layout Pre-dictor, Pair2Scene successfully bridges asset geometry with spatial logic. Experiments demonstrate that our framework excels at both fitting dataset distributions and generating high-density scenes exceeding the complexity observed in the training data. This shift toward relational modeling es-tablishes a robust and scalable foundation for learning-based scene generation. 

Limitations. While effective, Pair2Scene has limitations. The focus on spatial relations does not guarantee stylistic consistency during object retrieval. Additionally, the model struggles with corner cases, such as objects governed by multiple anchors or uncommon relations (e.g., hanging ob-jects). Future work will address these challenges. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents a relational framework designed to ad-vance the field of machine learning by improving the scal-ability and spatial reasoning of 3D indoor scene genera-tion. These advances have direct positive implications for the game industry, film production, and virtual reality by automating the creation of detailed virtual worlds. Further-more, our framework contributes significantly to Embodied AI and robotics by providing diverse, high-quality simulated environments for training agents to navigate and interact with human spaces safely. There are many other potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Aguina-Kang, R., Gumin, M., Han, D. H., Morris, S., Yoo, S. J., Ganeshan, A., Jones, R. K., Wei, Q. A., Fu, K., and Ritchie, D. Open-universe indoor scene generation using llm program synthesis and uncurated object databases. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09675 , 2024. Bi ´nkowski, M., Sutherland, D. J., Arbel, M., and Gretton, A. Demystifying mmd gans. In ICLR , 2018. C¸ elen, A., Han, G., Schindler, K., Van Gool, L., Armeni, I., Obukhov, A., and Wang, X. I-design: Personalized llm interior designer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02838 ,2024. Deng, W., Qi, M., and Ma, H. Global-local tree search in vlms for 3d indoor scene generation. In CVPR , 2025. Feng, W., Zhu, W., Fu, T.-j., Jampani, V., Akula, A., He, X., Basu, S., Wang, X. E., and Wang, W. Y. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual planning and generation with large language models. In NeurIPS , 2023. Feng, W., Zhou, H., Liao, J., Cheng, L., and Zhou, W. Casagpt: cuboid arrangement and scene assembly for interior design. In CVPR , 2025. Fu, H., Cai, B., Gao, L., Zhang, L.-X., Wang, J., Li, C., Zeng, Q., Sun, C., Jia, R., Zhao, B., et al. 3d-front: 3d furnished rooms with layouts and semantics. In ICCV ,2021. Fu, R., Wen, Z., Liu, Z., and Sridhar, S. Anyhome: Open-vocabulary generation of structured and textured 3d homes. In ECCV , 2024. Google. Gemini 3 flash: frontier intelligence built for speed, 2025. URL https://blog.google/products/ gemini/gemini-3-flash/ .Hao, J., Liang, N., Luo, Z., Xu, X., Zhong, W., Yi, R., Jin, Y., Lyu, Z., Zheng, F., Ma, L., et al. Mesatask: Towards task-driven tabletop scene generation via 3d spatial reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22281 , 2025. Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., and Hochreiter, S. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS ,2017. Hsu, J., Jin, E., Wu, J., and Mitra, N. J. From programs to poses: Factored real-world scene generation via learned program libraries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10292 ,2025. Lai, Z., Zhao, Y., Liu, H., Zhao, Z., Lin, Q., Shi, H., Yang, X., Yang, M., Yang, S., Feng, Y., et al. Hunyuan3d 2.5: Towards high-fidelity 3d assets generation with ultimate details. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16504 , 2025. 9Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Li, Y., Ran, X., Xu, L., Lu, T., Yu, M., Wang, Z., Xiangli, Y., Lin, D., and Dai, B. Proc-GS: Procedural building generation for city assembly with 3d gaussians. In CVPR ,2025. Lin, C. and Mu, Y. Instructscene: Instruction-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with semantic graph prior. In 

ICLR , 2024. Pang, Y., Wang, W., Tay, F. E., Liu, W., Tian, Y., and Yuan, L. Masked autoencoders for point cloud self-supervised learning. In ECCV , 2022. Paschalidou, D., Kar, A., Shugrina, M., Kreis, K., Geiger, A., and Fidler, S. Atiss: Autoregressive transformers for indoor scene synthesis. In NeurIPS , 2021. Pun, H. I. D., Tam, H. I. I., Wang, A. T., Huo, X., Chang, A. X., and Savva, M. Hsm: Hierarchical scene motifs for multi-scale indoor scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16848 , 2025. Raistrick, A., Mei, L., Kayan, K., Yan, D., Zuo, Y., Han, B., Wen, H., Parakh, M., Alexandropoulos, S., Lipson, L., et al. Infinigen indoors: Photorealistic indoor scenes using procedural generation. In CVPR , 2024. Ran, X., Li, Y., Xu, L., Yu, M., and Dai, B. Direct numerical layout generation for 3d indoor scene synthesis via spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05341 , 2025. Salimans, T., Karpathy, A., Chen, X., and Kingma, D. P. Pix-elcnn++: Improving the pixelcnn with discretized logistic mixture likelihood and other modifications. In ICLR ,2017. Sun, F.-Y., Liu, W., Gu, S., Lim, D., Bhat, G., Tombari, F., Li, M., Haber, N., and Wu, J. Layoutvlm: Differentiable optimization of 3d layout via vision-language models. In 

CVPR , 2025a. Sun, W., Li, X., Li, M., Xu, K., Meng, X., and Meng, L. Hierarchically-structured open-vocabulary indoor scene synthesis with pre-trained large language model. In AAAI ,2025b. Tang, J., Nie, Y., Markhasin, L., Dai, A., Thies, J., and Nießner, M. Diffuscene: Denoising diffusion models for generative indoor scene synthesis. In CVPR , 2024. van den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., Kalchbrenner, N., Senior, A., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio. In Proc. SSW , 2016. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS , 2017. Xiang, J., Lv, Z., Xu, S., Deng, Y., Wang, R., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Tong, X., and Yang, J. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506 , 2024. Yang, Y., Lu, J., Zhao, Z., Luo, Z., Yu, J. J., Sanchez, V., and Zheng, F. Llplace: The 3d indoor scene layout generation and editing via large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03866 , 2024a. Yang, Y., Sun, F.-Y., Weihs, L., VanderBilt, E., Herrasti, A., Han, W., Wu, J., Haber, N., Krishna, R., Liu, L., et al. Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embodied ai environments. In CVPR , 2024b. Zhai, G., ¨Ornek, E. P., Chen, D. Z., Liao, R., Di, Y., Navab, N., Tombari, F., and Busam, B. Echoscene: Indoor scene generation via information echo over scene graph diffu-sion. In ECCV , 2024. Zhang, L., Wang, Z., Zhang, Q., Qiu, Q., Pang, A., Jiang, H., Yang, W., Xu, L., and Yu, J. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d assets. In SIGGRAPH , 2024. Zhao, Z., Lai, Z., Lin, Q., Zhao, Y., Liu, H., Yang, S., Feng, Y., Yang, M., Zhang, S., Yang, X., et al. Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffusion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12202 ,2025. Zhong, W., Cao, P., Jin, Y., Luo, L., Cai, W., Lin, J., Wang, H., Lyu, Z., Wang, T., Dai, B., et al. Internscenes: A large-scale simulatable indoor scene dataset with realistic layouts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10813 , 2025. Zhou, X., Ran, X., Xiong, Y., He, J., Lin, Z., Wang, Y., Sun, D., and Yang, M.-H. Gala3d: Towards text-to-3d complex scene generation via layout-guided generative gaussian splatting. In ICML , 2024. Zhou, Y., Barnes, C., Lu, J., Yang, J., and Li, H. On the continuity of rotation representations in neural networks. In CVPR , 2019. 10 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation kitchen office washroom breakroom   

> Figure 8. More visualization results on new scene types.
> Table 5. Comparison of Inference Time (Seconds per Scene).

Method 3D-Front only Multi-source 

ATISS (Paschalidou et al., 2021) 9.45s -DiffuScene (Tang et al., 2024) 28.16s -Holodeck (Yang et al., 2024b) - 210.23s Infinigen-Indoors (Raistrick et al., 2024) - 686.44s LayoutVLM (Sun et al., 2025a) 247.92s 373.69s FactoredScenes (Hsu et al., 2025) 85.26s 85.26s Ours-Fit 26.89s -Ours-Beyond / Ours (Full) 49.28s 69.19s 

## A. Implementation Details 

For the implementation, we utilize Point-MAE (Pang et al., 2022) as the point cloud encoder, pretrained on our integrated 3D asset library. During training, the input assets are randomly sampled to 8,192 points. The latent dimension d is set to 512, and the layout predictor consists of 7 Transformer-like blocks. Each object in a relational tuple is represented by 4 learnable query tokens, and the MoL distribution is configured with K = 4 mixture components. The model was trained for 120 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 on 8 NVIDIA A100 (40G) GPUs, with a total batch size of 32. For training stability, we normalize the support anchor’s bounding box to a canonical cube and predict the dependent’s distribution within the local coordinate. In addition, the support trees and functional trees of Fig. 1, 5, and 6 are generated using the statistical synthesis approach. The additional results 8 are produced via LLM-guided generation using simple text prompts, such as “a kitchen scene.” Regarding the metrics in Table 1, we generated 20 test scenes for each of the bedroom and living room categories for evaluation. 

## B. Datasets. 

Our experimental evaluation is designed to validate the efficacy of the Pair2Scene framework across diverse scene generation tasks. Following the data curation pipeline described in Sec. 3.4, we extract a total of 138,429 relational tuples. This large-scale dataset aggregates 23,023 relations from 3D-Front (Fu et al., 2021) (comprising 4,530 bedrooms and 987 living rooms) for large furniture layouts, 56,719 relations from MesaTask (Hao et al., 2025) for high-density tabletop arrangements, and 58,687 relations from Real-to-Sim subset of InternScenes (Zhong et al., 2025) to enhance generalization to real scenes. Detailed information regarding the data distributions can be found in Fig. 10 through 18. 

## C. Inference Time Analysis 

In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the computational efficiency of Pair2Scene compared to existing baselines. We measure the average time required to generate a complete scene across both the 3D-Front only and multi-source settings. As summarized in Table 5, Pair2Scene exhibits competitive inference efficiency. In the 3D-Front only setting, ATISS remains faster due to its lightweight autoregressive design, while our Ours-Fit variant achieves comparable inference time to diffusion-based methods such as DiffuScene, despite providing stronger relational reasoning capabilities. Although the inference time for our Ours-Beyond and multi-source configurations increases due to the generation of higher scene complexity and a larger number of objects, it remains substantially more efficient than LLM-based or procedural frameworks. For instance, in the multi-source setting, Pair2Scene generates highly dense scenes in 69.19s, whereas LayoutVLM and 11 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Table 6. Comparison of Accuracy Rate and Resampling per Object. 

Method Acc. Rate ↑ Resample/Obj. ↓

Ours-Fit 75.63% 0.322 Ours-Beyond 57.12% 0.751 

Table 7. Quantitative validation of LLM-based extraction and ablation study of the k-check mechanism. We report mean and standard deviation across 30 random scenes per source. Datasource Precision ↑ Prec. (w/o k) Recall ↑ Rec. (w/o k) F1 ↑ F1 (w/o k)

3D-Front 0.924 ± 0.065 0.909 ± 0.062 0.921 ± 0.059 0.927 ± 0.070 0.922 0.918 

MesaTask 0.846 ± 0.041 0.777 ± 0.058 0.933 ± 0.085 0.967 ± 0.073 0.887 0.862 

InternScenes 0.800 ± 0.095 0.763 ± 0.073 0.807 ± 0.110 0.819 ± 0.067 0.803 0.790 

Holodeck require 373.69s and 210.23s respectively. This efficiency stems from our hierarchical formulation, which allows for localized distribution sampling rather than expensive global scene refinement or long-sequence autoregressive tokens. 

## D. Generalization to New Scene Types 

To demonstrate the generalization capability of our approach, Fig. 8 presents additional visualization results on novel scene categories. Despite the domain shift, our model is able to synthesize semantically coherent and physically plausible layouts by leveraging learned relational rules, indicating that our framework can extrapolate beyond the original dataset distribution for new but structurally related scene types. 

## E. Rejection Sampling Efficiency 

To quantify the overhead of our collision-aware rejection sampling, we measure the acceptance rate and the average resamples per object. As shown in Table 6, even in the high-density Ours-Beyond setting, the acceptance rate remains above 50% with less than one resample required per object on average. This efficiency demonstrates that our local rule modeling provides a high-quality initial proposal that is already largely consistent with physical constraints, rather than relying on brute-force sampling to find valid placements. 

## F. LLM-based Extraction Validation 

To validate the reliability of LLM-based spatial relation extraction, we evaluate its performance against human expert annotations on a subset of 30 randomly sampled scenes from each datasource. As summarized in Table 7, our method achieves high F1-scores across diverse environments, demonstrating strong robustness in structural understanding.While LLMs excel at capturing functional context, they are prone to ”semantic hallucinations”, erroneously predicting relations between semantically related but spatially distant objects. To mitigate this, we introduce the k-check mechanism, which enforces distance constraints tailored to specific relation types. Our ablation study confirms that removing the proximity factor k consistently leads to a drop in precision due to these hallucinations. The k-check is therefore essential for ensuring spatial precision with negligible impact on recall. 

## G. LLM Prompt for Scene Hierarchy Generation 

This section provides the detailed system prompt and task instructions used to guide LLM in generating structured scene hierarchies. The model is tasked with interpreting textual descriptions to produce physically plausible support relations ( Ts)and semantic functional dependencies ( Tf ). 

System R o l e : You a r e an e x p e r t s p a t i a l r e a s o n i n g a s s i s t a n t s p e c i a l i z i n g i n a r c h i t e c t u r a l s c e n e s y n t h e s i s and h i e r a r c h i c a l r e l a t i o n a l m o d e l i n g . 

12 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Task : C o n v e r t a u s e r − p r o v i d e d t e x t u a l d e s c r i p t i o n i n t o a s t r u c t u r e d s c e n e h i e r a r c h y c o n s i s t i n g o f a S u p p o r t T r e e ( $ \ mathbb {T} s $ ) and m u l t i p l e F u n c t i o n a l T r e e s ( $ \

mathbb {T} f $ ) . D e f i n i t i o n s : − S u p p o r t T r e e ( $ \ mathbb {T} s $ ) : A g l o b a l g r o u n d i n g h i e r a r c h y . * Root : Always t h e ” F l o o r ” . * Edges : A d i r e c t e d e d ge ( $O i , O j $ ) means $ O i $ p h y s i c a l l y s u p p o r t s $ O j $ ( e . g . , T a b l e s u p p o r t s Lamp ) . − F u n c t i o n a l T r e e ( $ \ mathbb {T} f $ ) : A s e m a n t i c d e p e n d e n c y h i e r a r c h y f o r o b j e c t s s h a r i n g t h e same s u p p o r t s u r f a c e . * Root : The common s u p p o r t a n c h o r from $\ mathbb {T} s $ . * Edges : A d i r e c t e d ed g e ( $O i , O j $ ) means $ O i $ i s t h e f u n c t i o n a l a n c h o r f o r $ O j $ ( e . g . , C h a i r i s p l a c e d r e l a t i v e t o a Desk ; P l a t e i s p l a c e d r e l a t i v e t o aP l a c e m a t ) . O u t p u t F or ma t : You must o u t p u t a v a l i d JSON o b j e c t w i t h t h e f o l l o w i n g s t r u c t u r e : 

{

” s u p p o r t t r e e ” : [

{” p a r e n t ” : ” F l o o r ” , ” c h i l d ” : ” O b j e c t A ” } ,

{” p a r e n t ” : ” O b j e c t A ” , ” c h i l d ” : ” O b j e c t B ” }

] , ” f u n c t i o n a l t r e e s ” : [

{

” s u p p o r t a n c h o r ” : ” O b j e c t A ” , ” e d g e s ” : [

{” p a r e n t ” : ” O b j e c t A ” , ” c h i l d ” : ” O b j e c t B ” } ,

{” p a r e n t ” : ” O b j e c t B ” , ” c h i l d ” : ” O b j e c t C ” }

]

}

]

}

U s e r I n p u t : ”{{ SCENE DESCRIPTION }} ”I n s t r u c t i o n s : 1 . I d e n t i f y a l l o b j e c t s m e n t i o n e d o r i m p l i e d by t h e s c e n e . 2 . C o n s t r u c t t h e S u p p o r t T r e e e n s u r i n g e v e r y o b j e c t i s g r o u n d e d ba ck t o t h e ” F l o o r ” . 3 . F o r e v e r y node i n t h e S u p p o r t T r e e t h a t h a s c h i l d r e n , c o n s t r u c t a F u n c t i o n a l T r e e t o d e f i n e t h e s e m a n t i c l a y o u t l o g i c b e t w e e n t h o s e c h i l d r e n . 4 . E n s u r e p h y s i c a l p l a u s i b i l i t y and commonsense s p a t i a l r e l a t i o n s h i p s . 

## H. User Study 

Fig. 9 shows the interface used in our user study. Participants are presented with multiple scenes and are asked to rank the scenes according to specific evaluation criteria. For each question, users inspect rendered scenes and drag-and-sort the options from best to worst based on a designated metric, following the provided positive and negative examples. This interface enables consistent and intuitive collection of human preference rankings across different evaluation dimensions. In addition, the CFS in Table 2 and 3 is specifically calculated as: CFS = MQ × SC Total Samples (10) 

## I. Floating Rate 

We investigate the vertical stability of generated scenes using the floating rate. As shown in Table 8, without the gravity simulation, the model suffers from a significant floating rate. In contrast, our full model effectively eliminates these artifacts, 13 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation   

> Figure 9. Screenshot of the user study interface.
> Table 8. Ablation analysis of the floating rate.

Variant Floating Rate ↓

w/o gravity 0.27 ± 0.12 

Full (Ours) 0

achieving a zero floating rate. 

## J. Collision Rate 

We evaluate the physical plausibility of the generated scenes using the collision rate, defined as the ratio of colliding objects to the total number of objects within a scene. Table 9 presents a comprehensive comparison against baselines and a detailed ablation study of our proposed components. Compared to other baselines, we achieve the best performance thanks to the learned local spatial distributions combined with rejection sampling. On the other hand, our full model significantly outperforms existing global layout predictors. The ablation results further highlight the importance of our architectural choices. Notably, the w/o relation variant lacks sampling rejection due to compatibility constraints. The substantial performance gap between the full model and the variant without rejection sampling demonstrates that our rejection mechanism effectively minimizes physical intersections. 14 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Table 9. Collision rate results: comparison with baselines (left) and ablation study (right). 

Comparison with Baselines Ablation Study 

Method Collision Rate ↓ Variant Collision Rate ↓

ATISS 0.31 ± 0.14 w/o relation 0.33 ± 0.18 

DiffuScene 0.24 ± 0.11 w/o pretrain 0.07 ± 0.06 

LayoutVLM 0.27 ± 0.06 w/o rejection 0.25 ± 0.08 

FactoredScenes 0.25 ± 0.09 Class-only 0.03 ± 0.04 

Ours-Fit 0.02 ± 0.05 w/o gravity 0.02 ± 0.05 

Ours-Beyond 0.05 ± 0.03 Full 0.02 ± 0.05 

Algorithm 1 Generate Scene Hierarchies 

1: Input: Scene Type P, Statistical Dependencies D = {sup dep , f unc dep }, Max Objects Nmax , Probability Coefficient k

2: Output: Support Tree Ts, Functional Trees {Tf }

3: {Ts, {Tf }} ← InitializeBaseTemplate (P) {Initial scene setup }

4: Counts ← InitializeInstanceCounts (Ts)

5: AddedCount ← 0

6: Queue ← [] {Stores tuples of (LeafNodeID, AnchorNodeID) }

7: {1. Identify Extendable Anchors and Leaf Nodes }

8: for each AnchorID, Tf,Anchor ∈ { Tf } do 

9: L ← GetBaseLabel (Ts[AnchorID ]) 

10: Leaves ← { n | n ∈ Nodes (Tf,Anchor ), Children (n) = ∅} 

11: for each n ∈ Leaves do 

12: Queue. append (( n, AnchorID )) 

13: end for 

14: end for 

15: {2. Recursive Expansion based on Dependency Probabilities }

16: while Queue is not empty and AddedCount < N max do 

17: (uleaf , u anchor ) ← Queue. pop (0) 

18: Lanc , L leaf ← MapToCategory (Ts[uanchor ], Ts[uleaf ]) 

19: if Lleaf ∈ sup dep [Lanc ] then 

20: T otalF req ← sup dep [Lanc ][ Lleaf ]

21: Candidates ← f unc dep [Lanc ][ Lleaf ]

22: for each (Lcand , F req cand ) ∈ Candidates do 

23: P ← k ∗ F req cand /T otalF req 

24: if random (0 , 1) < P and AddedCount < N max then 

25: {Instantiate and link new node }

26: Lnew ← GenerateUniqueLabel (Lcand , Counts )

27: Ts.AddNode (Lnew , parent = uanchor )

28: Tf,u anchor .AddNode (Lnew , parent = uleaf )

29: Queue. append (( uanchor )) 

30: AddedCount ← AddedCount + 1 

31: end if 

32: end for 

33: end if 

34: end while 

35: return Ts, {Tf }

15 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Algorithm 2 Procedural Scene Assembly  

> 1:

Input: 3D Asset Library V, Text Prompt/Scene Type P, Layout Predictor M 

> 2:

Output: Global 3D Scene G 

> 3:

G ← ∅  

> 4:

Zf loor ← Instantiate floor as root of Ts 

> 5:

G ← G ∪ { Zf loor } 

> 6:

{1. Joint Hierarchical Structuring } 

> 7:

{Ts, {Tf }} ← GenerateSceneHierarchies (P) {Support and Functional trees } 

> 8:

{2. Ordered Relation Serialization } 

> 9:

S ← []  

> 10:

N odes ← BFS (Ts) 

> 11:

for each Oi ∈ N odes do  

> 12:

Ssub ← DFS (Tf,i ) {Yields tuples of (anchor(s), dependent) } 

> 13:

S.append (Ssub ) 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

{3. Sequential Placement with Rejection Sampling } 

> 16:

for each relational tuple Tk = ( anchors , dependent ) ∈ S do  

> 17:

Adep ← RetrieveAsset (dependent , V) {Retrieve asset from library } 

> 18:

Placed ← False  

> 19:

while not Placed do  

> 20:

x ∼ plocal (x | anchors , Adep , M) {Sample conditioned on anchors and asset } 

> 21:

if x ∈ F and x within boundaries then  

> 22:

x∗ ← GravityRefinement (x) 

> 23:

G ← G ∪ { x∗} 

> 24:

Placed ← True  

> 25:

else  

> 26:

Reject candidate x 

> 27:

end if  

> 28:

end while  

> 29:

end for  

> 30:

return G 

> Figure 10. Distribution of dependents for floor as support anchor.

16 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Figure 11. Distribution of dependents for cabinet as support anchor. 

Figure 12. Distribution of dependents for floor as support anchor and bed as functional anchor. 

Figure 13. Distribution of dependents for floor as support anchor and cabinet as functional anchor. 

17 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Figure 14. Distribution of dependents for floor as support anchor and table as functional anchor. 

Figure 15. Distribution of dependents for table as support anchor. 

Figure 16. Distribution of dependents for table as support anchor and book as functional anchor. 

18 Learning Local Object Relations for Procedural Scene Generation 

Figure 17. Distribution of dependents for table as support anchor and bowl as functional anchor. 

Figure 18. Distribution of dependents for table as support anchor and computer as functional anchor. 

19