Title: Repurposing 3D Generative Model for Autoregressive Layout Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16299v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 01:15:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Repurposing 3D Generative Model for Autoregressive Layout Generation 

## Haoran Feng 1, 2* Yifan Niu 1* Zehuan Huang 1 Yang-Tian Sun 3

## Chunchao Guo 4 Yuxin Peng 5 Lu Sheng 1

> 1

## School of Software, Beihang University 2Tsinghua University 3University of Hong Kong 

> 4

## Tencent Hunyuan 5Peking University Project page: https://fenghora.github.io/LaviGen-Page/ Layout Instruction: A modern dining room featuring a sleek, airy design with a centrally placed dining table surrounded by evenly spaced chairs, and a piano   

> positioned in one corner.
> Object occlusion Object floating
> Out of boundary Object collision

LayoutGPT Layout as Language LayoutVLM Vision-based Optimization LaviGen Native 3D Layout Generation 

✓Semantic ✗Physical ✗Spatially Accurate ✓Semantic Physical ✗Spatially Accurate ✓Semantic ✓Physical ✓Spatially Accurate 

Figure 1. LaviGen generates layouts that are both physically plausible and semantically coherent from only 3D objects and instructions, whereas two baselines struggle. Our framework achieves that by leveraging the 3D prior knowledge of generative models to perform generation directly in the native 3D space. 

## Abstract 

We introduce LaviGen, a framework that repurposes 3D generative models for 3D layout generation. Unlike previ-ous methods that infer object layouts from textual descrip-tions, LaviGen operates directly in the native 3D space, formulating layout generation as an autoregressive pro-cess that explicitly models geometric relations and physical constraints among objects, producing coherent and phys-ically plausible 3D scenes. To further enhance this pro-cess, we propose an adapted 3D diffusion model that inte-grates scene, object, and instruction information and em-ploys a dual-guidance self-rollout distillation mechanism to improve efficiency and spatial accuracy. Extensive ex-periments on the LayoutVLM benchmark show LaviGen achieves superior 3D layout generation performance, with 19% higher physical plausibility than the state of the art    

> ∗Equal contribution ✉Corresponding author

and 65% faster computation. Our code is publicly avail-able at https://github.com/fenghora/LaviGen. 

## 1. Introduction 

Generating coherent 3D scene layouts [24, 36, 38, 50, 52, 57, 62, 64, 66, 76, 92–94, 99, 105] is essential for creat-ing realistic and interactive VR/AR environments. It aims to arrange objects in semantically consistent and physics-compliant configurations, such as placing chairs around a table instead of against walls. A central challenge, there-fore, lies in effectively encoding the geometric distributions describing spatial relationships and semantic dependencies among objects in 3D space. Early approaches [66] rely on limited 3D scene data with insufficient knowledge about real spatial relationships, and thus lead to physically implausible scene layouts. Re-cent methods [18, 52, 62, 93, 94, 105] such as Layout-

> arXiv:2604.16299v1 [cs.CV] 17 Apr 2026

GPT [18] treat layout as language in a structured, JSON-like format, which can be generated by large language models (LLMs) [1, 9, 16, 77]. While rich language prior from the LLMs have been employed, the absence of physical mod-eling often leads to spatially inconsistent layouts, resulting in object collisions, inter-penetrations, or floating. To ad-dress this limitation, LayoutVLM [73] leverages visual sig-nals to indirectly supervise layout generation, enhancing the visual plausibility of the resulting scenes. However, image-level supervision is computationally costly and lacks a fun-damental understanding of 3D spatial structures. Inspired by the observation that scene layout is a special type of geometric distribution, we pose the question: Can layout generation be learned directly from geometric dis-tributions of 3D scenes? Recent progress in 3D generative modeling [36, 64, 89] has made this feasible, offering pow-erful 3D priors that encode spatial relationships and geo-metric distributions. A key challenge, consequently, is how to harness these 3D priors, inherently providing spatial co-herence, to enable layout generation, completion, and edit-ing, tasks that are beyond the reach of previous text-based methods. In this context, we repurpose 3D generative mod-els for autoregressive layout generation: leveraging their built-in geometric priors about common spatial layouts, the model places objects sequentially to produce updated scene states that inherently satisfy physically plausible spatial ar-rangements. Compared to monolithic scene generation, where injecting all object conditions at once can destabilize the generation process, the autoregressive paradigm pro-vides greater controllability and inherently supports object addition and removal. However, building a 3D generative model into an autore-gressive layout generation system is non-trivial. On the one hand, the generative model must simultaneously perceive and learn to align with both the global space of the scene ge-ometry and the object’s own canonical space. On the other hand, autoregressive generation inherently suffers from ex-posure bias [34]; when generating long sequences, this ap-proach inevitably introduces accumulated spatial errors. To address these challenges, we propose LaviGen , a framework that repurposes 3D generative models for au-toregressive layout generation. Given an initial scene and an object, LaviGen encodes them and integrates semantic information, then generates an updated scene by placing the object in a semantically consistent manner within the native 3D space. In addition, a post-training strategy is proposed to mitigate exposure bias. LaviGen introduces a dual-guidance self-rollout distillation strategy that combines scene-level holistic guidance with step-wise scene-object alignment su-pervision, mitigating error accumulation in long-sequence generation and improving spatial coherence. As shown in Fig. 2, LaviGen leverages the geometric priors of 3D scenes to autoregressively place objects in se-Iterative Refinement             

> Autoregressive Generation
> You are a professional layout designer. Please
> design a bedroom measuring 4 m×5m, with a chair,
> a desk, a dresser, a bag chair on the carpet, and a
> queen-size bed. The descriptions of each furniture
> item provided below: ```json [{"description": "A
> queen-sized bed with a neatly arranged
> duvet...}, ...] ``` .The description of current scene
> provided below: ```json "boundary":
> {"floor_vertices":[[0,0,0],[4,0,0],[4,5,0],[0,5,0]], ...}
> ```
> LLMs/VLMs
> "chair-0": {
> "position": ...,
> "rotation":...,},
> "bed": {
> "position": ...,
> "rotation":...,},
> "desk": {
> "position": ...,
> "rotation":..., },

··· 

> A bedroom with a
> chair, a desk, a dresser,
> a bag chair on the
> carpet, and a queen-
> size bed.
> LLMs

··· 

> VAE
> 3D Generative Model
> Assets
> Initial State

Figure 2. Our layout generation pipeline versus existing methods that treat layouts as language or rely on vision-based optimization. 

quence, achieving more geometrically consistent and plau-sible layout reasoning while avoiding time-consuming iter-ative refinement [73]. Extensive experiments on the bench-mark proposed by LayoutVLM [73] demonstrate that Lav-iGen outperforms existing layout generation approaches, achieving 19% higher physical plausibility than the state of the art and reducing computational time by roughly 65%. It also supports a broader range of applications, such as layout completion and layout editing, which are difficult to achieve without operating in native 3D space. The main contribu-tions of this work are summarized as follows: • We propose LaviGen , a framework that repurposes a 3D generative model for autoregressive layout generation, enabling layout synthesis directly in the native 3D space. • Adapted 3D diffusion model and dual-guidance self-rollout distillation to capture environment-object contex-tual relationships and mitigate exposure bias. • Experiments show that LaviGen achieves superior physi-cal plausibility and generalization in layout synthesis and extends naturally to layout completion and layout editing. 

## 2. Related Work 

3D Layout Generation. Generating coherent 3D layouts is a long-standing challenge [24, 50, 52, 62, 64, 66, 92– 94, 105]. Early learning-based methods, represented by ATISS [66], employed autoregressive transformers to di-rectly regress object placements. This direct coordinate A bedroom with a 

> chair, a desk, a
> dresser, a bag chair
> on the carpet, and a
> queen-size bed.

LLMs Autoregressive 3D Layout Diffusion Model  

> state 0 object 0
> state 1
> object 1
> state 2
> object 2
> state 3

··· ···                 

> object n
> state n+1
> (a) Autoregressive Layout Diffusion
> state n
> state n+1
> object input
> fitting
> position
> rotation
> scale
> (b) Object Pose Computation Figure 3. Overview of the LaviGen framework for autoregressive 3D layout generation. (a) LaviGen formulates layout generation as an autoregressive process. Specifically, conditioned on LLM-encoded instructions, it takes the current scene state Siand object Oito generate the updated state Si+1 . (b) The high-fidelity scene is obtained by computing the spatial difference between Si+1 and Sito locate the newly generated region, and fitting the object Oito derive its spatial parameters.

prediction, however, often neglected geometric semantics, leading to spatial inconsistencies. Subsequent approaches turned to foundation models, initiated by methods that treat layout as a language task [18, 52, 62, 93, 94, 105]. These models leverage LLMs to output structured textual plans, excelling at semantic coherence. A noted limitation, how-ever, is the difficulty in capturing explicit physical con-straints, resulting in object collisions or floating artifacts. To address these physical inconsistencies, LayoutVLM [73] in-troduced 2D visual supervision, using rendered images and differentiable optimization to refine poses. While this im-proves plausibility, this 2D supervision is not fully holis-tic for complex 3D interactions and introduces computa-tionally expensive optimization. Both paradigms operate in non-native representations. In contrast, LaviGen formulates the task as a native 3D autoregressive process, operating di-rectly in 3D space to explicitly model geometric relations and physical constraints from the ground up. 

3D Generative Models. Recent development in diffusion models [28, 71] and large-scale 3D datasets [12, 13] has greatly advanced the field of 3D generation [5, 6, 14, 20, 25, 26, 30, 35, 39, 44, 45, 47, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 61, 63, 65, 69, 74, 78–82, 84, 86, 88, 90, 95, 100, 101, 103]. A series of research [33, 37, 58, 59, 68, 74, 78, 80, 82, 90] generates multi-view images and then reconstructs 3D assets, but two-stage bias often degrades geometric and textural fidelity. A growing body of work [7, 15, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51, 75, 85– 87, 89, 100, 102, 103] has explored native 3D diffusion architectures, typically combining a variational autoen-coder [42] for latent encoding with a diffusion transformer (DiT) [67] for structured denoising in 3D space. Exhibit-ing high 3D fidelity and structural consistency, these mod-els learn rich spatial relationships from large-scale 3D data, offering strong geometric priors that underpin our accurate and physically consistent layout generation. 

Autoregressive Diffusion and Distillation. The sequential placement of objects naturally frames layout generation as a long-sequence autoregressive generation problem. How-ever, conventional diffusion models with bidirectional at-tention perform poorly on such autoregressive tasks [22, 29, 43, 66]. Concurrently, the autoregressive generation process inherently suffers from exposure bias [34], leading to accu-mulated errors [3, 4, 23, 70, 98]. To alleviate this, Diffusion Forcing [21, 31, 40] trains models to denoise tokens condi-tioned on ground-truth context with independently sampled noise levels. Self Forcing [10, 32, 34, 54, 91] further im-proves stability by performing autoregressive rollouts dur-ing training, conditioning on the model’s own outputs. We adopt a similar distillation-based autoregressive mechanism to enhance both efficiency and stability. 

## 3. Methodology 

As illustrated in Fig. 3, LaviGen is a unified framework that repurposes a pretrained 3D generative model for language-conditioned 3D layout synthesis. Leveraging structured 3D priors, our framework ensures spatial coherence and physi-cal plausibility, substantially reducing object collisions and boundary violations. We begin by revisiting structured 3D latent models [89] in Sec. 3.1, which form the geometric backbone of our approach. We then detail the overall gen-erative pipeline in Sec. 3.2, the autoregressive layout gen-eration mechanism in Sec. 3.3, and the dual-guidance self-rollout scheme at post-training in Sec. 3.4, which jointly enable efficient, accurate, and editable 3D layout synthesis. 

3.1. Preliminary 

Structured 3D generative models. The 3D prior mod-ule in LaviGen draws inspiration from structured 3D latent diffusion models TRELLIS [89], which typically generate 3D assets through a two-stage denoising process that first reconstructs coarse spatial structures and then refines fine-grained geometry and appearance. LaviGen retains only the structure-level generation stage, predicting sparse voxel oc-cupancies to model the spatial organization of objects and capture physically and semantically plausible spatial rela-tionships. Each 3D asset is represented by a set of voxel-indexed local latent codes 

Z = {zp | p ∈ P} , (1) where P denotes the set of active voxel positions near the object surface, and each zp ∈ Rd is the local latent attached to voxel p. This structured representation allows for ac-curate modeling of 3D space. For generation, TRELLIS adopts Flow Matching models, which add noise ϵ to clean data samples x0 through x(t) = (1 −t)x0 +tϵ over time step 

t. The reverse dynamics are expressed as a time-dependent vector field v(x, t ) = ∇tx, which is learned via a neural approximation vθ by minimizing the flow matching loss: 

L = Et,x 0,ϵ ∥vθ (x, t ) − (ϵ − x0)∥22 . (2) 

3.2. LaviGen for 3D Layout Generation 

In this work, we introduce LaviGen , a 3D generative model for autoregressive layout generation that fundamentally dif-fers from prior approaches [18, 66, 73, 93, 105] predicting the spatial coordinates of objects from textual descriptions. Our framework directly models the spatial configuration of objects in the native 3D space, enabling the generation of layouts that are both physically plausible and semantically coherent with textual descriptions. As illustrated in Fig. 3, given the current state Si, a target object Oi, and the corresponding layout instruction, Lavi-Gen generates a physically and semantically plausible up-dated layout Si+1 directly within the 3D space, which then serves as the initial state for subsequent generation steps. Specifically, the layout instruction is encoded into a con-ditioning vector c for subsequent generation steps. Subse-quently, during each generation step, the current state Si

and the target object Oi are encoded and concatenated with a noise latent, which are then fed into an autoregressive 3D layout diffusion model. The model then performs de-noising conditioned on c through cross-attention, produc-ing the updated scene state Si+1 . This new state is then combined with the next object Oi+1 , and the process is re-peated in an autoregressive manner to synthesize a coherent 3D layout sequence. Finally, to reconstruct a high-fidelity 3D scene, we extract surface points from the high-resolution voxel occupancy decoded by the VAE. We then downsam-ple the original furniture meshes and register them to the ex-tracted surface points via Iterative Closest Point, estimating optimal rotation, scale, and translation parameters through least-squares fitting. The aligned objects are then placed into the generated layout to obtain the final scene. 

3.3. Autoregressive 3D Layout Diffusion 

The autoregressive layout generation enables the model to reconstruct the given scene S and integrate a new object O

into it, producing spatially coherent and physically plausi-ble layouts. To this end, we design two key components: an 

adapted 3D diffusion model and an identity-aware em-bedding module . These designs collectively enable the model to understand the current scene context and the 3D geometric properties of objects, generating physically plau-sible and semantically coherent layouts in native 3D space. 

Architecture Adaptation. To enable object placement, we adapt the original 3D diffusion model by integrating scene, object, and noisy latents into a unified latent space to cap-ture structured geometric relationships. Specifically, during training, the scene S and object O are first encoded into latent representations s and o, respectively, where s, o ∈

RN ×d, with N = H ×W ×L representing the total number of latent voxels in a grid of height H, width W , and length 

L, while d denotes the feature dimension of each voxel. The latent representation of the target scene x0 is perturbed with a randomly sampled noise ϵ ∈ RN ×d, matching the shape of s and o, and then concatenated with them and processed together with the textual embedding c to guide denoising through semantic conditioning. The overall training objective is 

L = Et,x 0,s,o,c,ϵ ∥vθ (x, s, o, c, t ) − (ϵ − x0)∥22 . (3) 

Identity-aware Positional Embedding. Although the adapted 3D diffusion model enables interactions among scene, object, and latent tokens, distinguishing the current scene state from newly added objects remains challeng-ing. To mitigate this, an identity-aware embedding is in-troduced to explicitly encode the source identity of each to-ken. Concretely, we assign identical positional encodings to the noisy latent x and the state s, reflecting their shared spatial coordinates, while the object o receives a distinct en-coding to preserve its individual geometric semantics. This is implemented by extending the standard Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE) [72] with an additional identity flag f

indicating the source of each token. After concatenating the input [x, s, o ], each token is associated with a voxel at po-sition (f, h, w, l ), where f = 0 for the noisy latent x and state s, and f = 1 for the object o. The spatial coordinates 

(h, w, l ) denote the voxel’s position within its respective la-tent grid. The complex-valued positional frequencies are computed as 

Φ( f, h, w, l ) = [ ϕf (f ); ϕh(h); ϕw(w); ϕl(l) ] , (4) where ϕf (f ) encodes the latent source identity and 

ϕh, ϕ w, ϕ l follow the standard RoPE for spatial positions. MMDiT 

> A bedroom with a chair, a
> desk, a dresser, a bag
> chair on the carpet, and a
> queen-size bed.

LLMs 

Dec.     

> Identity-aware Embedding
> f=0 f=0 f=1
> State Object Noise
> Updated state Figure 4. The overview of the adapted 3D diffusion model . The encoded scene state and object are concatenated with the noisy latent and, together with the identity-aware embedding, fed into the multimodal diffusion transformer for noise prediction. The de-noised output is then decoded to produce the updated scene state.

By embedding identity information in this manner, the model distinguishes different latent streams while preserv-ing spatial alignment, thus enabling precise semantic disen-tanglement and geometry-consistent reasoning. 

3.4. Post-Training via Dual-Guidance Self-Rollout 

While the autoregressive paradigm enables progressive scene composition, it suffers from exposure bias: the model is trained on ground-truth context but must condition on its own imperfect outputs at inference, causing errors to accu-mulate as collisions and implausible placements. We mit-igate this via self-rollout post-training, where the student autoregressively rolls out layouts from its own predictions during training, supervised by a holistic teacher for scene-level quality and a step-wise teacher for per-object accuracy. 

Self-Rollout Mechanism. Inspired by Self-Forcing [34], we introduce a self-rollout distillation framework. In con-trast to Teacher Forcing, which conditions on ground-truth context Si−1, our method performs an autoregressive roll-out during training, where the student Gθ conditions on its own generated layout Sθi−1:Teacher Forcing: Sθi = Gθ (Si−1, O i, c ), (5) Self-Rollout: Sθi = Gθ (Sθi−1, O i, c ), (6) where i = 1 , . . . , n and Sθ 

> 0

=S0. By replacing ground-truth conditioning with self-generated context, we force the model to encounter and learn to recover from its own er-rors, effectively bridging the train–test distribution gap and reducing error accumulation. We instantiate LDM as dis-tribution matching distillation [96], minimizing the reverse KL divergence via score distillation with a learned critic model. A key distinction from prior self-rollout methods in video generation [34] is that our autoregressive states are cumulative , as each Si implicitly encodes all previ-ously placed objects, unlike video frames which are inde-pendent rendering targets. Consequently, per-frame super-vision strategies used in video are insufficient here—errors in early placements propagate into all subsequent states, de-manding supervision that addresses both the global scene quality and individual object placements. This motivates our dual-guidance design below. We provide pseudocode in the supplementary material. 

Holistic Guidance. Given this cumulative structure, a natu-ral first approach is to supervise only the final scene Sθn. We use the bidirectional base model as a global planner pTS ,conditioned on text c, to provide holistic supervision over 

Sθn generated from C = ( S0, {Oi}ni=1 , c ):

Lholistic = LDM (pθ (Sn|C ) || pTS (Sn|c)) (7) However, this alone proved insufficient, since supervision at only the terminal state provides no intermediate correction, and the teacher pTS , not conditioned on object Oi, offers scene-level but not object-placement guidance. 

Step-Wise Guidance. To provide dense, object-aware su-pervision at every step, we use the causal autoregressive model from Sec. 3.3 as a per-step teacher pTP . Conditioned on Oi, it provides corrective signals at each step i based on the student’s imperfect context. Let Ci = ( Sθi−1, O i, c ):

Lstep =

> N

X

> i=1

LDM (pθ (Si|C i) || pTP (Si|C i)) (8) Our final dual-guidance objective combines both terms with equal weights: 

Ldual = Lholistic + Lstep . (9) Concretely, Gθ is updated to align with the teacher score sT

via: 

∇θ Ldual ≈ Ext,t [( sT (xt, t ) − sψ (xt, t )) ∇θ x0], (10) where sψ is the critic score approximating the student distri-bution. By training on self-rolled-out sequences, the student is directly exposed to its own error distribution; the holistic and step-wise teachers then provide complementary correc-tive signals at the scene and object level, respectively. Full mathematical derivations and pseudocode are provided in the supplementary material. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Setting 

Implementation Details. We implemented LaviGen with an architecture inspired by Trellis [89], reusing its struc-tured variational autoencoder module, and trained the LayoutGPT Holodeck I-Design LayoutVLM LaviGen Layout Instruction 

> A beach-inspired
> bedroom with a queen
> bed and rattan chair,
> featuring airy, sunlit
> serenity.
> An immersive gaming
> room with desks,
> speakers, and neatly
> aligned chairs.
> A playful children’s
> room with a twin bed
> in the corner,
> featuring a fun and
> versatile layout.
> An upscale deli with
> wooden shelves of
> gourmet goods
> arranged for easy
> browsing.

Figure 5. Qualitative comparison of text-to-3D-layout generation. LaviGen produces physically plausible and spatially coherent layouts aligned with text prompts, effectively avoiding common failure cases such as object collisions (e.g., “gaming room”) and floating artifacts (e.g., “children’s room”, “deli”) observed in baselines. 

model from scratch using a three-stage training process. First, we replace the original text encoder with Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [2], keeping its parameters frozen, and train the remaining model as the base bidirectional 3D gener-ative model. Next, we adopted an autoregressive genera-tion paradigm to train the teacher model, which serves as the foundation for subsequent distillation and efficient infer-ence. Finally, we conduct dual-guidance self-rollout distil-lation: the teacher is distilled into a few-step student, which is then trained with our hybrid objective using the bidirec-tional model as the holistic teacher and the causal model as the step-wise teacher. For autoregressive ordering, the Qwen-VL encoder derives a semantic object sequence from the input instruction during training, while inference sup-ports either this learned order or user-defined sequences such as bottom-up placement. Our model employs a 3B-parameter DiT and converges stably without delicate hy-perparameter tuning, with 20 epochs for base training, 20k steps for teacher fine-tuning, and 5k steps for distillation. 

Datasets. For the first training stage, we use the same dataset as Trellis [89], which contains approximately 500K high-quality 3D assets collected from four public datasets: Objaverse-XL [11], ABO [8], 3D-FUTURE [19], and HSSD [41]. For each 3D model, we first render its corre-sponding images and then use GPT-4o [77] to generate se-mantically rich annotations. In the second and third stages, we train our model on two large-scale scene datasets, 3D-FRONT [19] and InternScenes [104], comprising about 15K high-quality layout scenes with well-structured spa-tial arrangements. For fair comparison, we follow Lay-outVLM [73] to evaluate LaviGen on the same benchmark. 

Metrics. We follow LayoutVLM [73] and evaluate 3D layouts in terms of physical plausibility, semantic align-ment, and computational efficiency. Physical plausibility is quantified by the Collision-Free (CF) and In-Boundary (IB) scores, ensuring that objects are non-overlapping and remain within scene boundaries. Semantic alignment is as-sessed using Positional (Pos.) and Rotational (Rot.) co-herency , which measure the consistency between the gen-erated layout and the textual prompt. For layouts with-out ground truth, GPT-4o [77] provides semantic ratings from both top-down and side views. We also report the 

Physically-Grounded Semantic Alignment (PSA) score in-troduced by LayoutVLM, which combines semantic rel-evance with physical feasibility. Finally, we include the average inference time (T) to evaluate computational effi-ciency. As LayoutVLM [73] exhibits notably higher latency with increasing object counts, we report results on layouts with 8–10 objects. All metrics except T are normalized to [0,100], where higher values indicate better performance; lower T (s) indicates faster inference. 

4.2. Main Result 

Baselines. We compare our method with several state-of-the-art approaches for text-driven layout generation. Lay-outGPT [18] relies on a large language model to di-rectly produce JSON-based layouts. Holodeck [93] and I-Design [105] enhance this process with iterative optimiza-Input Layout Input Object Edited Layout    

> ......, add a wooden chair near the desk.
> ......, remove the arcade machine in the corner.
> Input Layout Input Object Edited Layout
> ......, add a table in the center.
> ......, remove the middle bookshelf.

Figure 6. Qualitative results for layout editing. LaviGen’s unified framework supports context-aware modifications, including object insertion (top row) and removal (bottom row). By operating directly in 3D space, the model performs edits that are spatially coherent and semantically consistent with the surrounding context, and enables direct manipulation of 3D layouts, where previous methods struggle. 

tion for layout refinement, while LayoutVLM [73] further incorporates visual cues to improve generation quality. 

Qualitative and Quantitative Comparison. As shown in Fig. 5, by operating directly in 3D space, LaviGen accu-rately models inter-object relations and produces physically plausible arrangements with minimal collisions or floating artifacts, even in cluttered scenes like a gaming room where other baselines [18, 73, 93, 105] often fail. Examining exist-ing baselines, LayoutGPT [18] generates layouts that are se-mantically coherent but frequently suffers from collisions, out-of-bound placements, and floating objects. Meanwhile, Holodeck [93] struggles with arranging large objects, which negatively affects its performance. Through iterative op-timization, I-Design [105] partially mitigates these issues. LayoutVLM [73] takes a step further by leveraging ren-dered views to effectively address out-of-bound placements, though collisions and floating objects remain problematic. Quantitative results in Tab. 1 align with these observa-tions. LaviGen achieves the best CF and IB scores, demon-strating remarkable physical plausibility. LayoutGPT [18] excels in semantic coherence but overlooks physical con-straints, resulting in frequent collisions and boundary vio-lations. Holodeck [93] performs poorly on geometric met-rics, particularly the IB score, as small parameter variations for large objects often cause severe placement errors. I-Design [105] stands as the strongest text-only method, yet its iterative optimization incurs substantial computational cost. LayoutVLM [73], benefiting from visual supervision, performs relatively well overall, though physical plausibil-ity remains suboptimal and rendering introduces additional overhead. These limitations stem from excessive information com-pression: representing objects solely with bounding boxes fails to capture fine-grained spatial interactions, and while LayoutVLM partially compensates with visual cues, it is constrained by the trade-off between rendered views and 

Table 1. Main quantitative comparison and ablation study. The top section compares LaviGen against state-of-the-art baselines. The bottom section ablates the key components of our model, val-idating their progressive contributions to the final performance. Methods Physical Semantic PSA ↑ T (s) ↓                                                          

> CF ↑IB ↑Pos. ↑Rot. ↑
> LayoutGPT [18] 83.8 24.2 80.8 78.0 16.6 21.3
> Holodeck [93] 77.8 8.1 62.8 55.6 5.6 58.2 I-Design [105] 76.8 34.3 68.3 62.8 18.0 179.2 LayoutVLM [73] 81.8 94.9 77.5 73.2 58.8 75.5 base model 75.6 64.8 45.1 44.7 16.7 145.7 + id-aware emb. 89.1 96.8 68.8 66.5 71.4 144.1 +Lholistic .79.5 81.9 61.4 58.7 59.7 24.5 +Lstep .(full) 97.3 98.6 76.9 77.1 78.8 24.3

computational cost. These findings underscore the advan-tage of generating layouts directly in native 3D space, where complete geometric information supports physically plausi-ble and semantically coherent arrangements. 

User Study. To further evaluate our model, we conducted a user study with 43 participants, each answering 10 ques-tions, yielding 430 responses. For each question, partici-pants selected the best model based on physical plausibility, semantic consistency, and overall quality. Tab. 2 shows that 

LaviGen excels in physical plausibility and overall quality while maintaining comparable semantic consistency. 

4.3. Applications 

Layout Completion. Layout completion refers to the task of generating a complete layout for a partially specified scene, given layout instructions and 3D assets. This sce-nario is common, as incomplete or unlabeled 3D layouts often result from limited annotations or missing metadata, making robust completion crucial for downstream tasks. However, language-based approaches [18, 93, 105] strug-base model + id-aware emb. + step-wise guidance (full) + holistic guidance Layout Instruction                   

> A game room with a
> central chess table and
> bookshelves along
> opposite walls.
> A deli with a checkout
> counter at the center
> and shelves lining
> both sides. Figure 7. Qualitative ablation study for LaviGen .We show the progressive improvement from the base model (left) to the full model (right). The baseline produces cluttered layouts with severe collisions, while adding the identity-aware embedding yields a more plausible distribution but still suffers collisions from exposure bias. Distillation with holistic guidance yields inaccurate object fitting and severe inversion errors for small objects. In contrast, the full model generates physically plausible and semantically coherent layouts. Table 2. User study results for layout generation. Methods Phys. Plaus. ↑Sem. Consist. ↑Ovr. Qual. ↑
> LayoutGPT [18] 16.0 38.8 7.9 LayoutVLM [73] 31.9 27.7 36.5 LaviGen 52.1 33.5 55.6

gle in these cases, as they rely on textual cues rather than 3D spatial understanding. In contrast, LaviGen successfully completes this task by operating directly in 3D space, plac-ing objects into the current scene with physical plausibil-ity and semantic coherence. This capability makes it well-suited for applications such as robotic perception, AR/VR environment generation, and autonomous navigation, where comprehensive textual annotations are often unavailable. 

Layout Editing. Layout editing is also a practically impor-tant capability, allowing users to interact directly with 3D scenes. With a simple adjustment, LaviGen can perform high-quality edits, as shown in Fig. 6. To enable this capa-bility, we modify the training paradigm by swapping the au-toregressive targets, allowing the model to remove objects from a scene and regenerate them in a context-aware man-ner. This formulation enables object removal, insertion, and replacement within a single framework, allowing the model to perform edits that are spatially coherent and semantically consistent with the surrounding context. By operating di-rectly in 3D space without relying on textual cues, LaviGen 

further demonstrates strong generalization and practicality for real-world layout modification tasks. 

4.4. Ablation Study 

To assess the contribution of each component, we con-duct ablation studies starting from the base 3D generative model and progressively adding the identity-aware embed-ding, holistic guidance, and step-wise guidance. The qual-itative and quantitative results are presented in Fig. 7 and Tab. 1. Initially, the baseline fails to correctly interpret ob-ject–scene relationships, producing cluttered and semanti-cally inconsistent layouts with severe collisions. Adding the identity-aware embedding improves layout coherence, but exposure bias still introduces extraneous points between ob-jects, causing collisions; without distillation, inference also remains slow due to excessive steps. When distilled with holistic guidance, the generation time is greatly reduced, but object-fitting accuracy suffers, particularly for small ob-jects, leading to errors in rotation prediction and noticeable flipping artifacts. Finally, with the introduction of step-wise guidance, i.e., the proposed LaviGen , the model pro-duces physically plausible and semantically consistent lay-outs. These results demonstrate the advantage of generating layouts directly in native 3D space and validate the effec-tiveness of the proposed framework. 

## 5. Conclusion 

We introduced LaviGen , a framework for autoregressive 3D layout generation that operates directly in native 3D space. Unlike prior approaches that treat layout as language, Lav-iGen leverages the geometric priors encoded in 3D genera-tive models, enabling physically plausible and semantically coherent layout generation. We introduce an adapted au-toregressive 3D layout diffusion model, fully modeling the spatial relationships between the current scene and input objects to generate an updated scene. To mitigate expo-sure bias in long-sequence generation, we further propose dual-guidance self-rollout distillation, improving training stability and physical fidelity. Experiments demonstrate that LaviGen achieves superior spatial accuracy and effi-ciency across baselines, highlighting how its 3D generative paradigm provides a principled foundation for geometry-aware, semantically controllable scene generation. Repurposing 3D Generative Model for Autoregressive Layout Generation 

# Supplementary Material 

## 6. Implementation Details 

6.1. Base 3D Generative Model 

To equip our system with a strong and expressive 3D prior, we begin by training a base 3D generative model. Our design follows the state-of-the-art structured 3D genera-tive framework TRELLIS [89], particularly its structure-level generation stage, which predicts sparse voxel occu-pancies to capture the spatial organization of objects and to model physically and semantically plausible scene lay-outs. Concretely, we reuse the structured variational autoen-coder of TRELLIS as the backbone, providing a compact and expressive representation of 3D structures. To further enhance the model’s ability to interpret complex seman-tic layouts, we adopt Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [2] as the text encoder, ensuring rich cross-modal grounding. The de-sign of our flow transformer builds upon the architecture of Qwen-Image [83] and integrates the Multimodal Diffusion Transformer (MMDiT) [17], thereby enabling unified mod-eling of text and 3D representations within a single Trans-former framework. Within each block of the MMDiT, we incorporate a novel positional encoding mechanism, Mul-timodal Scalable RoPE (MSRoPE), designed to provide consistent and scale-robust positional representations across both modalities. This formulation enables effective multi-modal fusion while preserving stable positional semantics for text and scalable spatial modeling for 3D latent repre-sentations. The detailed experimental settings are as follows. We represent the 3D scene using a 64 3 voxel grid, which is used across all training stages as well as during inference. For training, we adopt classifier-free guidance (CFG) [27] with a drop rate of 0.1 and use the AdamW optimizer [60] with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4. The model is trained for 400K steps on 16 A100 GPUs (80GB) with a batch size of 16 per GPU. At inference time, the CFG strength is set to 3 and 50 sampling steps are used. 

6.2. Teacher Model 

With a strong 3D prior established, the next stage focuses on applying it to layout generation. To preserve the spatial knowledge already acquired by the base model, we min-imize modifications to the original architecture. Specifi-cally, as illustrated in Sec. 3.3, the teacher model builds upon the base 3D generative model by jointly taking the current scene state and the target object as input. To en-able the model to distinguish between the scene and objects while facilitating faster convergence, we further introduce an identity-aware positional embedding. Together, these designs allow the teacher model to achieve comprehensive modeling of the geometric relationships between the scene and objects. The experimental setup is largely consistent with that of the first stage, with the main differences being a reduced training length of 100K steps and a learning rate of 5 × 10 −5.

6.3. Post-Training via Dual-Guidance Self-Rollout 

To mitigate the exposure bias inherent in autoregressive generation, we employ a dual-guidance self-rollout strategy, as summarized in Algorithm 1. This stage distills a pre-trained, few-step student generator following the methodol-ogy detailed in the main paper Sec. 3.4. Below, we specify the network components and hyperparameters used in this process. The distillation framework comprises four distinct mod-els. The Student Model Gθ is an efficient, few-step 3D lay-out diffusion model, initialized via distillation from the Au-toregressive Teacher Model trained in Sec. 6.2. The Holistic Teacher pTS provides the final supervision signal Lholistic 

and is implemented using the frozen Base 3D Generative Model described in Sec. 6.1. The Step-Wise Teacher pTP

provides intermediate corrective signals Lstep utilizing the frozen Autoregressive Teacher Model detailed in Sec. 6.2. Finally, to implement the Distribution Matching Distillation (DMD) loss, we employ a trainable Critic Model fψ . This critic is initialized with the same architecture and weights as the Base 3D Generative Model, i.e., the Holistic Teacher, and is trained to approximate the score function of the stu-dent’s generated data distribution. 

Training Hyperparameters. We perform post-training with a batch size of 1 given the sequential, memory-intensive nature of the self-rollout process. The Student Model Gθ is optimized using AdamW with a learning rate of 2 × 10 −6, (β1, β 2) = (0 .0, 0.999) , and weight decay of 

0.01 . The Critic Network fψ is optimized separately us-ing AdamW with a learning rate of 5 × 10 −7, (β1, β 2) = (0 .0, 0.999) , and weight decay of 0.01 . To stabilize score estimation, we use a Generator/Critic update ratio of 1:5 (i.e., five critic updates per student update). For teacher score computation sT , Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) is applied with a scale of 3.0.

Loss Function Formulation. Our dual-guidance objec-tive Ldual = Lholistic + Lstep is formulated using Distribu-tion Matching Distillation [97]. This objective minimizes the reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence by leveraging the score difference between the student (approximated by the critic fψ ) and the teacher. The gradient for the student Gθ

is derived as follows: 

∇θ Ldual ≈ Ext,t [( sT (xt, t ) − sψ (xt, t )) ∇θ x0] (11) where x0 = Gθ (xt, t, Ci) denotes the clean layout predicted by the student. Here, sT represents the score function of the fixed teacher (either pTS for Lholistic or pTP for Lstep ), and 

sψ is the score estimated by the critic. The critic is con-currently trained to approximate the student’s score using a standard denoising objective. 

## 7. Additional Results 

7.1. Scalability to More Objects 

We evaluate on 8–10 objects for fair comparison against ex-isting baselines. Thanks to self-rollout distillation, Lavi-Gen inherently supports a “train short, test long” paradigm and can handle scenes with more than 20 objects, as shown in Fig. 8. 

Figure 8. Qualitative results for long-sequence generation with more than 20 objects. 

7.2. Generalizability Across Backbones 

Our framework is not tied to a specific 3D generative back-bone. To validate this, we apply LaviGen to TRELLIS [89] using its original CLIP text encoder, without our addi-tionally trained Qwen encoder. As shown in Fig. 9, the model maintains high physical plausibility and semantic co-herence, confirming that our recipe successfully transfers across different base architectures without relying on large-scale training infrastructure. Qwen+Voxel DiT (Ours)Trellis

Figure 9. Generalization across different 3D generation back-bones. 

Algorithm 1 Dual-Guidance Self-Rollout Distillation 

Require: Denoise timesteps {t1, . . . , t T }, number of ob-jects N

Require: Student generator Gθ , step-wise teacher pTP ,holistic teacher pTS

Require: Initial state S0, object sequence {Oi}Ni=1 , text prompt c 

> 1:

loop  

> 2:

Sctx ← S0, Soutputs ← []  

> 3:

Sample s ∼ Uniform (1 , . . . , T ) 

> 4:

for i = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 5:

Ci ← (Sctx , O i, c ) 

> 6:

Initialize ztT ∼ N (0 , I ) 

> 7:

for j = T, . . . , s do  

> 8:

if j == s then  

> 9:

Enable gradient computation  

> 10:

ˆS0 ← Gθ (ztj ; tj , Ci) 

> 11:

Soutputs .append ( ˆS0) 

> 12:

Sctx ← ˆS0.detach ()  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

Disable gradient computation  

> 15:

ˆS0 ← Gθ (ztj ; tj , Ci) 

> 16:

Sample ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ) 

> 17:

ztj−1 ← Ψ( ˆS0, ϵ, t j−1) 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

Lstep ← 0, Sctx ← S0 

> 22:

for i = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 23:

ˆSi ← Soutputs [i] 

> 24:

Ci ← (Sctx , O i, c ) 

> 25:

Lstep ← L step + LDMD ( ˆSi; pTP , Ci) 

> 26:

Sctx ← ˆSi.detach ()  

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

ˆSN ← Soutputs .last ()  

> 29:

Lholistic ← L DMD ( ˆSN ; pTS , c ) 

> 30:

Ldual ← L step + Lholistic  

> 31:

Update θ via ∇θ Ldual  

> 32:

end loop 

7.3. Generation Diversity 

LaviGen naturally supports diverse outputs via stochastic sampling. Given the same input instruction, the model gen-erates varied yet plausible layouts, as illustrated in Fig. 10. 

## 8. Limitations and Future Work. 

Although LaviGen gains strong geometric distribution mod-eling capability from operating in the native 3D space, several limitations remain. First, due to constraints in Figure 10. Diverse layout results generated from the same input instruction. 

model capacity and computational resources, we adopt a 

64 3 3D grid resolution. While generally adequate for most objects, this resolution becomes insufficient for small in-stances, leading to mismatches in subsequent spatial co-ordinate computations. To address this issue, our future work will explore more efficient computation strategies for higher-resolution voxel grids and investigate denser 3D rep-resentations capable of supporting higher spatial resolutions and capturing finer spatial details. Additionally, as shown in Tab. 1, the semantic consistency of the generated lay-outs remains suboptimal. We attribute this primarily to the scarcity of high-quality annotations, particularly for layouts with complex spatial configurations or object arrangements. In future work, we will enhance our annotation pipeline to collect and process additional high-quality labeled data, and explore more advanced text-conditioning mechanisms to further improve the robustness and semantic reliability of 

LaviGen .

## References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. 2 [2] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhao-hai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Jun-yang Lin. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. In arXiv , 2025. 6, 1[3] Boyuan Chen, Diego Mart´ ı Mons´ o, Yilun Du, Max Sim-chowitz, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent Sitzmann. Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffu-sion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:24081–24125, 2024. 3 [4] Guibin Chen, Dixuan Lin, Jiangping Yang, Chunze Lin, Juncheng Zhu, Mingyuan Fan, Hao Zhang, Sheng Chen, Zheng Chen, Chengchen Ma, et al. Skyreels-v2: Infinite-length film generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13074 , 2025. 3 [5] Sijin Chen, Xin Chen, Anqi Pang, Xianfang Zeng, Wei Cheng, Yijun Fu, Fukun Yin, Zhibin Wang, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, et al. Meshxl: Neural coordinate field for generative 3d foundation models. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:97141–97166, 2024. 3 [6] Yiwen Chen, Tong He, Di Huang, Weicai Ye, Sijin Chen, Jiaxiang Tang, Xin Chen, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, Gang Yu, Guosheng Lin, and Chi Zhang. Meshanything: Artist-created mesh generation with autoregressive transformers, 2024. 3 [7] Yiwen Chen, Zhihao Li, Yikai Wang, Hu Zhang, Qin Li, Chi Zhang, and Guosheng Lin. Ultra3d: Efficient and high-fidelity 3d generation with part attention, 2025. 3 [8] Jasmine Collins, Shubham Goel, Kenan Deng, Achlesh-war Luthra, Leon Xu, Erhan Gundogdu, Xi Zhang, Tomas F Yago Vicente, Thomas Dideriksen, Himanshu Arora, et al. Abo: Dataset and benchmarks for real-world 3d ob-ject understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 21126–21136, 2022. 6 [9] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blis-tein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodal-ity, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. 2 [10] Justin Cui, Jie Wu, Ming Li, Tao Yang, Xiaojie Li, Rui Wang, Andrew Bai, Yuanhao Ban, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Self-forcing++: Towards minute-scale high-quality video gener-ation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02283 , 2025. 3 [11] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Chris-tian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:35799–35813, 2023. 6 [12] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13142–13153, 2023. 3 [13] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Chris-tian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. 3 [14] Junting Dong, Qi Fang, Zehuan Huang, Xudong Xu, Jingbo Wang, Sida Peng, and Bo Dai. Tela: Text to layer-wise 3d clothed human generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 19–36. Springer, 2025. 3 [15] Shaocong Dong, Lihe Ding, Xiao Chen, Yaokun Li, Yuxin Wang, Yucheng Wang, Qi Wang, Jaehyeok Kim, Chenjian Gao, Zhanpeng Huang, et al. From one to more: Contex-tual part latents for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 8230–8240, 2025. 3 [16] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Ab-hishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2407, 2024. 2 [17] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas M¨ uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling recti-fied flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning ,2024. 1 [18] Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional vi-sual planning and generation with large language models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 18225–18250, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 [19] Huan Fu, Rongfei Jia, Lin Gao, Mingming Gong, Binqiang Zhao, Steve Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. 3d-future: 3d furniture shape with texture. International Journal of Com-puter Vision , 129(12):3313–3337, 2021. 6 [20] Daoyi Gao, Yawar Siddiqui, Lei Li, and Angela Dai. Me-shart: Generating articulated meshes with structure-guided transformers. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 618–627, 2025. 3 [21] Kaifeng Gao, Jiaxin Shi, Hanwang Zhang, Chunping Wang, Jun Xiao, and Long Chen. Ca2-vdm: Efficient autoregres-sive video diffusion model with causal generation and cache sharing. In ICML . PMLR, 2025. 3 [22] Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer. In ECCV , 2022. 3 [23] Yuchao Gu, Weijia Mao, and Mike Zheng Shou. Long-context autoregressive video modeling with next-frame pre-diction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19325 , 2025. 3 [24] Zeqi Gu, Yin Cui, Zhaoshuo Li, Fangyin Wei, Yunhao Ge, Jinwei Gu, Ming-Yu Liu, Abe Davis, and Yifan Ding. Artiscene: Language-driven artistic 3d scene generation through image intermediary. 2025 IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 2891–2901, 2025. 1, 2 [25] Zekun Hao, David W. Romero, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Yu Liu. Meshtron: High-fidelity, artist-like 3d mesh generation at scale, 2024. 3 [26] Zexin He, Tengfei Wang, Xin Huang, Xingang Pan, and Zi-wei Liu. Neural lightrig: Unlocking accurate object normal and material estimation with multi-light diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 26514–26524, 2025. 3 [27] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In arXiv , 2022. 1 [28] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 3 [29] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. In ICLR , 2023. 3 [30] Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04400 , 2023. 3 [31] Jinyi Hu, Shengding Hu, Yuxuan Song, Yufei Huang, Mingxuan Wang, Hao Zhou, Zhiyuan Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, and Maosong Sun. Acdit: Interpolating autoregressive con-ditional modeling and diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07720 , 2024. 3 [32] Junchao Huang, Xinting Hu, Boyao Han, Shaoshuai Shi, Zhuotao Tian, Tianyu He, and Li Jiang. Memory forcing: Spatio-temporal memory for consistent scene generation on minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03198 , 2025. 3 [33] Xiufeng Huang, Ka Chun Cheung, Runmin Cong, Simon See, and Renjie Wan. Stereo-gs: Multi-view stereo vision model for generalizable 3d gaussian splatting reconstruc-tion. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Con-ference on Multimedia , pages 9822–9831, 2025. 3 [34] Xun Huang, Zhengqi Li, Guande He, Mingyuan Zhou, and Eli Shechtman. Self forcing: Bridging the train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08009 , 2025. 2, 3, 5 [35] Zehuan Huang, Hao Wen, Junting Dong, Yaohui Wang, Yangguang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yan-Pei Cao, Ding Liang, Yu Qiao, Bo Dai, et al. Epidiff: Enhancing multi-view syn-thesis via localized epipolar-constrained diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9784–9794, 2024. 3 [36] Zehuan Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Xingqiao An, Yunhan Yang, Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Ding Liang, Xihui Liu, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. Midi: Multi-instance diffusion for single image to 3d scene generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,2025. 1, 2 [37] Zehuan Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Haoran Wang, Ran Yi, Lizhuang Ma, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. Mv-adapter: Multi-view consistent image generation made easy. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 16377–16387, 2025. 3 [38] Zhening Huang, Xiaoyang Wu, Fangcheng Zhong, Heng-shuang Zhao, Matthias Nießner, and Joan Lasenby. Lite-reality: Graphics-ready 3d scene reconstruction from rgb-d scans, 2025. 1 [39] Moritz Ibing, Gregor Kobsik, and Leif Kobbelt. Octree transformer: Autoregressive 3d shape generation on hi-erarchically structured sequences. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2698–2707, 2023. 3 [40] Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang, Yang Song, Yadong Mu, and Zhouchen Lin. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video generative modeling. In ICLR , 2025. 3 [41] Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X Chang, and Manolis Savva. Habitat synthetic scenes dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of 3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal naviga-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16384–16393, 2024. 6 [42] Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. 3 [43] Dan Kondratyuk, Lijun Yu, Xiuye Gu, Jose Lezama, Jonathan Huang, Grant Schindler, Rachel Hornung, Vigh-nesh Birodkar, Jimmy Yan, Ming-Chang Chiu, et al. Videopoet: A large language model for zero-shot video generation. In ICML , 2024. 3 [44] Songlin Li, Despoina Paschalidou, and Leonidas Guibas. Pasta: Controllable part-aware shape genera-tion with autoregressive transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13677 , 2024. 3 [45] Weiyu Li, Jiarui Liu, Rui Chen, Yixun Liang, Xuelin Chen, Ping Tan, and Xiaoxiao Long. Craftsman: High-fidelity mesh generation with 3d native generation and interactive geometry refiner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14979 , 2024. 3[46] Weiyu Li, Jiarui Liu, Hongyu Yan, Rui Chen, Yixun Liang, Xuelin Chen, Ping Tan, and Xiaoxiao Long. Craftsman3d: High-fidelity mesh generation with 3d native diffusion and interactive geometry refiner. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5307–5317, 2025. 3 [47] Weiyu Li, Xuanyang Zhang, Zheng Sun, Di Qi, Hao Li, Wei Cheng, Weiwei Cai, Shihao Wu, Jiarui Liu, Zihao Wang, Xiao Chen, Feipeng Tian, Jianxiong Pan, Zeming Li, Gang Yu, Xiangyu Zhang, Daxin Jiang, and Ping Tan. Step1x-3d: Towards high-fidelity and controllable generation of textured 3d assets, 2025. 3 [48] Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Wanli Ouyang, et al. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,2025. 3 [49] Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Wanli Ouyang, et al. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,2025. 3 [50] Chenguo Lin and Yadong Mu. Instructscene: Instruction-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with semantic graph prior. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 1, 2 [51] Yuchen Lin, Chenguo Lin, Panwang Pan, Honglei Yan, Yiqiang Feng, Yadong Mu, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Partcrafter: Structured 3d mesh generation via composi-tional latent diffusion transformers, 2025. 3 [52] Lu Ling, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yifan Ding, Yu Zeng, Yichen Sheng, Yunhao Ge, Ming-Yu Liu, Aniket Bera, and Zhaoshuo Li. Scenethesis: Combining language and visual priors for 3d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02836 , 2025. 1, 2, 3 [53] Anran Liu, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Xiaoxiao Long, Zhiyang Dou, Hao-Xiang Guo, Ping Luo, and Wenping Wang. Part123: part-aware 3d reconstruction from a single-view image. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers ,pages 1–12, 2024. 3 [54] Kunhao Liu, Wenbo Hu, Jiale Xu, Ying Shan, and Shijian Lu. Rolling forcing: Autoregressive long video diffusion in real time, 2025. 3 [55] Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Linghao Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Hansheng Chen, Chong Zeng, Ji-ayuan Gu, and Hao Su. One-2-3-45++: Fast single image to 3d objects with consistent multi-view generation and 3d diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10072– 10083, 2024. 3 [56] Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Haian Jin, Linghao Chen, Mukund Varma T, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. One-2-3-45: Any sin-gle image to 3d mesh in 45 seconds without per-shape opti-mization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 36, 2024. 3 [57] Xinhang Liu, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Agen-tic 3d scene generation with spatially contextualized vlms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20129 , 2025. 1 [58] Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03453 , 2023. 3 [59] Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9970–9980, 2024. 3 [60] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In arXiv , 2019. 1 [61] Shuqi Lu, Haowei Lin, Lin Yao, Zhifeng Gao, Xiaohong Ji, Weinan E, Linfeng Zhang, and Guolin Ke. Uni-3dar: Unified 3d generation and understanding via autoregression on compressed spatial tokens. Arxiv , 2025. 3 [62] Yongsen Mao, Junhao Zhong, Chuan Fang, Jia Zheng, Rui Tang, Hao Zhu, Ping Tan, and Zihan Zhou. Spatiallm: Training large language models for structured indoor mod-eling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 2025. 1, 2, 3 [63] Quan Meng, Lei Li, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Lt3sd: Latent trees for 3d scene diffusion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 650–660, 2025. 3 [64] Yanxu Meng, Haoning Wu, Ya Zhang, and Weidi Xie. Sce-negen: Single-image 3d scene generation in one feedfor-ward pass. In arXiv , 2025. 1, 2 [65] Charlie Nash, Yaroslav Ganin, SM Ali Eslami, and Peter Battaglia. Polygen: An autoregressive generative model of 3d meshes. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pages 7220–7229. PMLR, 2020. 3 [66] Despoina Paschalidou, Amlan Kar, Maria Shugrina, Karsten Kreis, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fidler. Atiss: Autoregressive transformers for indoor scene synthesis. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 34: 12013–12026, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 4 [67] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion mod-els with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , pages 4195– 4205, 2023. 3 [68] Yansong Qu, Shaohui Dai, Xinyang Li, Yuze Wang, You Shen, Shengchuan Zhang, and Liujuan Cao. Deocc-1-to-3: 3d de-occlusion from a single image via self-supervised multi-view diffusion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence , pages 8677–8685, 2026. 3 [69] Barbara Roessle, Norman M¨ uller, Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bul` o, Peter Kontschieder, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. L3dg: Latent 3d gaussian diffusion. In SIG-GRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 3[70] Sand-AI. Magi-1: Autoregressive video generation at scale, 2025. 3 [71] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 , 2020. 3 [72] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568: 127063, 2024. 4 [73] Fan-Yun Sun, Weiyu Liu, Siyi Gu, Dylan Lim, Goutam Bhat, Federico Tombari, Manling Li, Nick Haber, and Jia-jun Wu. Layoutvlm: Differentiable optimization of 3d lay-out via vision-language models. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 29469–29478, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 [74] Jiaxiang Tang, Zhaoxi Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Tengfei Wang, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. Lgm: Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content cre-ation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 1–18. Springer, 2025. 3 [75] Jiaxiang Tang, Ruijie Lu, Zhaoshuo Li, Zekun Hao, Xuan Li, Fangyin Wei, Shuran Song, Gang Zeng, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Efficient part-level 3d object generation via dual volume packing, 2025. 3 [76] Xiang Tang, Ruotong Li, and Xiaopeng Fan. Towards ge-ometric and textural consistency 3d scene generation via single image-guided model generation and layout optimiza-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14841 , 2025. 1 [77] OpenAI teams. Gpt-4o system card. In arXiv , 2024. 2, 6 [78] Vikram Voleti, Chun-Han Yao, Mark Boss, Adam Letts, David Pankratz, Dmitry Tochilkin, Christian Laforte, Robin Rombach, and Varun Jampani. Sv3d: Novel multi-view synthesis and 3d generation from a single image using la-tent video diffusion. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 439–457. Springer, 2025. 3 [79] Zhengyi Wang, Jonathan Lorraine, Yikai Wang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Sanja Fidler, and Xiaohui Zeng. Llama-mesh: Unifying 3d mesh generation with language models, 2024. [80] Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Yifei Chen, Chendong Xiang, Shuo Chen, Dajiang Yu, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Crm: Single image to 3d textured mesh with convo-lutional reconstruction model. In European conference on computer vision , pages 57–74. Springer, 2024. 3 [81] Si-Tong Wei, Rui-Huan Wang, Chuan-Zhi Zhou, Baoquan Chen, and Peng-Shuai Wang. Octgpt: Octree-based mul-tiscale autoregressive models for 3d shape generation. In 

Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Confer-ence Papers , pages 1–11, 2025. [82] Hao Wen, Zehuan Huang, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, and Lu Sheng. Ouroboros3d: Image-to-3d generation via 3d-aware recursive diffusion. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 21631–21641, 2025. 3 [83] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, Deqing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. Qwen-image technical report. In arXiv , 2025. 1 [84] Kailu Wu, Fangfu Liu, Zhihan Cai, Runjie Yan, Hanyang Wang, Yating Hu, Yueqi Duan, and Kaisheng Ma. Unique3d: High-quality and efficient 3d mesh generation from a single image. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:125116–125141, 2024. 3 [85] Ruiqi Wu, Xinjie Wang, Liu Liu, Chunle Guo, Jiaxiong Qiu, Chongyi Li, Lichao Huang, Zhizhong Su, and Ming-Ming Cheng. Dipo: Dual-state images controlled articu-lated object generation powered by diverse data, 2025. 3 [86] Shuang Wu, Youtian Lin, Feihu Zhang, Yifei Zeng, Jingxi Xu, Philip Torr, Xun Cao, and Yao Yao. Direct3d: Scalable image-to-3d generation via 3d latent diffusion transformer. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 121859–121881, 2024. 3 [87] Shuang Wu, Youtian Lin, Feihu Zhang, Yifei Zeng, Yikang Yang, Yajie Bao, Jiachen Qian, Siyu Zhu, Xun Cao, Philip Torr, and Yao Yao. Direct3d-s2: Gigascale 3d generation made easy with spatial sparse attention, 2025. 3 [88] Zhennan Wu, Yang Li, Han Yan, Taizhang Shang, Weixuan Sun, Senbo Wang, Ruikai Cui, Weizhe Liu, Hiroyuki Sato, Hongdong Li, et al. Blockfusion: Expandable 3d scene generation using latent tri-plane extrapolation. ACM Trans-actions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–17, 2024. 3 [89] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and ver-satile 3d generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2025. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1 [90] Jiale Xu, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Xintao Wang, Shenghua Gao, and Ying Shan. Instantmesh: Efficient 3d mesh generation from a single image with sparse-view large reconstruction models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07191 ,2024. 3 [91] Shuai Yang, Wei Huang, Ruihang Chu, Yicheng Xiao, Yuyang Zhao, Xianbang Wang, Muyang Li, Enze Xie, Yingcong Chen, Yao Lu, and Song Hanand Yukang Chen. Longlive: Real-time interactive long video generation. In 

arxiv , 2025. 3 [92] Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Peiyuan Zhi, and Siyuan Huang. Physcene: Physically interactable 3d scene syn-thesis for embodied ai. In Proceedings of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 1, 2 [93] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Al-varo Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, et al. Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embodied ai environments. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16227–16237, 2024. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7[94] Yixuan Yang, Zhen Luo, Tongsheng Ding, Junru Lu, Mingqi Gao, Jinyu Yang, Victor Sanchez, and Feng Zheng. Llm-driven indoor scene layout generation via scaled human-aligned data synthesis and multi-stage preference optimization. ArXiv , abs/2506.07570, 2025. 1, 2, 3 [95] Junliang Ye, Zhengyi Wang, Ruowen Zhao, Shenghao Xie, and Jun Zhu. Shapellm-omni: A native multimodal llm for 3d generation and understanding, 2025. 3 [96] Tianwei Yin, Micha¨ el Gharbi, Taesung Park, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, Fredo Durand, and Bill Freeman. Improved distribution matching distillation for fast image synthesis. NeurIPS , 2024. 5 [97] Tianwei Yin, Micha¨ el Gharbi, Richard Zhang, Eli Shecht-man, Fredo Durand, William T Freeman, and Taesung Park. One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation. In CVPR , 2024. 1 [98] Tianwei Yin, Qiang Zhang, Richard Zhang, William T Freeman, Fredo Durand, Eli Shechtman, and Xun Huang. From slow bidirectional to fast autoregressive video diffu-sion models. In CVPR , 2025. 3 [99] Huangyue Yu, Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Chen, Yandan Yang, Puhao Li, Rongpeng Su, Jiaxin Li, Qing Li, Wei Liang, Zhu Song-Chun, Tengyu Liu, and Siyuan Huang. Metascenes: Towards automated replica creation for real-world 3d scans. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion(CVPR) , 2025. 1 [100] Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d assets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–20, 2024. 3 [101] Ruowen Zhao, Junliang Ye, Zhengyi Wang, Guangce Liu, Yiwen Chen, Yikai Wang, and Jun Zhu. Deepmesh: Auto-regressive artist-mesh creation with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 10612–10623, 2025. 3 [102] Wang Zhao, Yan-Pei Cao, Jiale Xu, Yuejiang Dong, and Ying Shan. Assembler: Scalable 3d part assembly via an-chor point diffusion. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2025. 3 [103] Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xin Chen, Xianfang Zeng, Rui Wang, Pei Cheng, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, Gang Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Michelangelo: Conditional 3d shape generation based on shape-image-text aligned latent representation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. 3 [104] Weipeng Zhong, Peizhou Cao, Yichen Jin, Li Luo, Wenzhe Cai, Jingli Lin, Hanqing Wang, Zhaoyang Lyu, Tai Wang, Bo Dai, Xudong Xu, and Jiangmiao Pang. Internscenes: A large-scale simulatable indoor scene dataset with realistic layouts. In arXiv , 2025. 6 [105] Ata C ¸ elen, Guo Han, Konrad Schindler, Luc Van Gool, Iro Armeni, Anton Obukhov, and Xi Wang. I-design: Person-alized llm interior designer. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 Workshops , 2025. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7