Title: GardenDesigner: Encoding Aesthetic Principles into Jiangnan Garden Construction via a Chain of Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01777v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:46:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# GardenDesigner: Encoding Aesthetic Principles into Jiangnan Garden Construction via a Chain of Agents 

# Mengtian Li 1,2 , Fan Yang 1, Ruixue Xiong 1, Yiyan Fan 1, Zhifeng Xie 1,2 †, Zeyu Wang 3†

> 1

# Shanghai University 

> 2

# Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Motion Picture Special Effects 

> 3

# The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

{mtli, yangphan, xiongruixue, yiyanfan, zhifeng xie }@shu.edu.cn, zeyuwang@ust.hk 

Figure 1. The motivation of GardenDesigner. Traditional manual modeling of Jiangnan gardens requires document searching, data modeling, and expert design, making it time-consuming and expertise-dependent. GardenDesigner automates Jiangnan garden construction via analyzing the user text and acquiring the assets, and then optimizes the garden layout. For applications, users can construct a Jiangnan garden through text input, which can be used for creating VR/AR experiences, film and game development, and real garden construction. 

# Abstract 

Jiangnan gardens, a prominent style of Chinese classical gardens, hold great potential as digital assets for film and game production and digital tourism. However, manual modeling of Jiangnan gardens heavily relies on expert ex-perience for layout design and asset creation, making the process time-consuming. To address this gap, we propose 

GardenDesigner , a novel framework that encodes aesthetic principles for Jiangnan garden construction and integrates a chain of agents based on procedural modeling. The water-centric terrain and explorative pathway rules are applied by terrain distribution and road generation agents. Selec-tion and spatial layout of garden assets follow the aesthetic and cultural constraints. Consequently, we propose asset selection and layout optimization agents to select and ar-range objects for each area in the garden. Additionally,  

> †Corresponding authors.

we introduce GardenVerse for Jiangnan garden construc-tion, including expert-annotated garden knowledge to en-hance the asset arrangement process. To enable interaction and editing, we develop an interactive interface and tools in Unity, in which non-expert users can construct Jiang-nan gardens via text input within one minute. Experiments and human evaluations demonstrate that GardenDesigner can generate diverse and aesthetically pleasing Jiangnan gardens. Project page is available at https://monad-cube.github.io/GardenDesigner .

# 1. Introduction 

As the most important genres of Chinese classical gar-dens, Jiangnan gardens exemplify compact urban compo-sitions with intricate spatial configurations [6]. Unlike gen-eral landscape parks, they emphasize a balance of architec-ture, plants, and rocks. Typical features include winding 

> arXiv:2604.01777v1 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026

corridors, attics, pavilions that frame ever-changing views, rockeries that simulate mountains within limited space, and ponds that reflect both natural scenery and surrounding structures [31]. The traditional construction of Jiangnan gardens involves much manual effort, including three main steps: (1) document search, collecting historical documents, drawings, and photographs; (2) asset modeling, reconstruct-ing architectural elements and plants based on these materi-als; (3) expert design, addressing terrain shaping and garden layout, relying on specialized knowledge. However, this process typically involves three to four designers and takes about three to four weeks to complete, making it heavily reliant on manual effort and time-consuming. Current learning-based scene generation methods [16, 27, 52] exhibit limited generalizability due to domain con-straints in training datasets. Procedural modeling meth-ods [25, 39, 49] that incorporate large language models (LLMs) or visual language models (VLMs) focus on either spatially limited room space or unstructured natural envi-ronments. However, the construction of Jiangnan gardens remains unexplored, and three problems remain to be ad-dressed. (1) Complex terrain and garden layout : Com-pared to general landscapes, Jiangnan gardens exhibit in-tricate terrain structures and spatial layouts, where terrain, water, and architecture are interwoven under implicit aes-thetic logic. (2) Aesthetic principle constraints : Due to the abstract nature of Jiangnan gardens’ design rules, en-coding the aesthetic principles into a computational genera-tion framework remains challenging. (3) Absence of Jiang-nan garden dataset : Lacking stylistic appearance and cul-tural annotation, existing 3D datasets of ordinary or urban objects are not suitable for Jiangnan garden construction. To address these challenges, we propose GardenDe-signer , which integrates a chain of agents, procedural mod-eling, and aesthetic principles encoding for Jiangnan gar-dens construction. Specifically, GardenDesigner is com-posed of three modules: Hierarchical Garden Composi-tion (Section 3.2), Knowledge-embedded Asset Arrange-ment (Section 3.3). First, Hierarchical Garden Composition decomposes the construction process into procedural terrain and road generation. Subsequently, Knowledge-embedded Asset Arrangement focuses on asset selection and optimiz-ing objects according to the specified constraints for each area. The key insight is to select objects and set constraints according to area information and expert-guided garden knowledge. Consequently, we introduce GardenVerse , a high-quality Jiangnan garden dataset that contains typical Jiangnan garden style of digital assets with expert-annotated garden knowledge, enhancing the specific knowledge con-text for knowledge-embedded asset arrangement. To support convenient designing and interaction, we de-velop an interface and editing tools in Unity, in which the non-expert user can construct Jiangnan gardens via text in-put within one minute. After construction, the system can output the 2D garden layout as a reference for the real gar-den creation and building. In summary, GardenDesigner opens new avenues for intangible cultural heritage preser-vation and creative applications in digital art and games. Our main contributions are as follows: • We propose GardenDesigner , a novel framework that encodes aesthetic principles for Jiangnan garden con-struction via integrating a chain of agents with an expert-annotated artistic dataset GardenVerse .• We propose a hierarchical garden composition module to generate terrain and roads with aesthetic principles, and a knowledge-embedded asset arrangement mechanism for asset selection and layout optimization. • We develop an interface and editing tools in Unity, in which non-expert users can construct Jiangnan gardens via text input. The system outputs a 2D layout for real garden construction and supports virtual tourism. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Scene Generation 

Procedural Scene Generation. Procedurally generating scenes with rules and manual algorithms has long been a robust methodology. CityEngine [30] and Khan et al. [19] procedurally model the city. Recently, Raistrick et al. [33, 34] generates assets in scenes from shape to texture. 

Data-Driven Scene Generation. Previous learning-based methods have explored different modalities to generate scenes, including images [50], texts [16], layouts [1], scene graphs [52] and raw room [51], while some meth-ods [47, 48] extend to large-scale city generation. 

Scene Generation with LLMs and VLMs. Feng et al. [13] takes the first step to utilize LLMs to generate object position, while some methods [4, 14, 49] generate the scene graph. Other methods [17, 26, 37, 54] explore the outdoor generation based on Blender [3] or Infinigen [33]. Liu et al. [25] procedurally model the landscape with LLMs. Feng et al. [13] adapt VLM to optimize indoor layout and some methods [2, 24] explored simple outdoor scene. Previous methods have primarily focused on ordinary in-door spaces or unstructured landscapes. In contrast, gen-erating Jiangnan gardens poses unique challenges, requir-ing fine-grained spatial composition, hierarchical reason-ing, and the integration of aesthetic and cultural principles. 

2.2. 3D Object Datasets 

Indoor and Ordinary Objects. ShapeNet [5] collects 3D CAD models from public repositories and previous datasets. GSO [10] offers scans of household objects, and OmniObject3D [46] expands both quantity and diversity. Objaverse-XL [7] extends Objaverse [8] to 10.2M 3D as-sets. However, existing datasets lack sufficient diversity or fidelity for cultural scenes such as Jiangnan gardens. 

Outdoor and Natural Objects. BuildingNet [35] and City-Craft [9] mine the architectures from websites [36, 40]. Zhu et al. [55] collects a scanned 3D crops dataset and some methods [21, 54] create architectural or natural as-sets with Unreal [12] or Blender [3]. Procedural modeling methods [19, 30] employ parametric or L-system rules for virtual cities. Other works [15, 23] simulate vegetation, and Infinigen [33] extends to large-scale natural textured assets. Despite extensive research on architectural and natural objects, Jiangnan gardens featuring traditional architecture, distinctive flora, and rocks remain underexplored. Existing datasets lack the stylistic coherence, cultural context, and fine-grained diversity needed for heritage-oriented scenes. 

2.3. Cultural Heritage and Digital Tourism 

Cultural Heritage (CH) encompasses tangible and intangi-ble artifacts, traditions, and environments, in which interac-tive systems transform preservation from passive documen-tation to active participation.To foster public engagement, prior works have explored diverse cultural heritage applica-tions, including immersive cultural tourism [20], underwa-ter heritage exploration [53], and interactive historical sto-rytelling and artifact preservation [18]. These applications effectively employ immersion, narra-tive, and interaction to represent CH. However, most focus on heritage exploration and exhibition rather than the gen-eration of heritage-inspired content. Therefore, a genera-tive and interactive system is essential to lower the creative threshold, translating complex garden aesthetics into tangi-ble designs through simple text input. Such an approach not only preserves the Jiangnan garden tradition but also revi-talizes it as a living, participatory form of cultural heritage. 

# 3. Method 

3.1. Problem Statement 

Jiangnan garden construction involves generating terrain and roads, configuring objects in a bounded space based on the user’s instructions, and following certain Jiangnan garden design rules. After integrating expert experience of garden designers and literature search [6, 31], we summa-rize key aesthetic principles to guide Jiangnan garden con-struction from four perspectives of terrain distribution , road generation , asset selection , and relational constraint :• Naturalistic and Water-Centric Foundation: The ter-rain is designed to be an idealized, miniature microcosm of a natural landscape, and the water is considered the lifeblood and the soul of the garden to organize elements. • Discovery and Winding Paths: Following the water and area border, paths are designed for exploration, creating a series of unfolding, painterly scenes rather than simple transit, deliberately avoiding straight lines and symmetry. • Symbolism and Miniature: Selects assets that are sym-bolic miniatures of the natural world. The assets should be culturally appropriate and fit their specific location, re-flecting both natural content and cultural intentionality. • Asymmetrical Balance: Arranges objects harmoniously, creating a dynamic and natural balance. Positional con-straints are used to hide and reveal views, making the gar-den feel larger and encouraging exploration. Formally, given a user text U , aesthetic principles Kglobal 

and garden assets Oasset = {o1, ..., o n} with knowledge an-notation Ka = {k1, ..., k n}, the objective is to create a Jiangnan garden that meets the textual input and aesthetic principles. We decompose the Jiangnan garden construction task into four steps and implement it via a chain of agents, in which the content generated by previous agents serves as the basis for subsequent agents. (1) Terrain Distribution Agent ( AT ): this agent generates the terrain T based on the user’s text and global knowledge. (2) Road Genera-tion Agent ( AR): based on terrain T , this agent generates the road R, also guided by global knowledge. (3) Asset Se-lection Agent ( AS ): with terrain and road context (T, R )

available, this agent selects a set of appropriate assets Os

from the library. (4) Layout Optimization Agent ( AC ): 

the final agent takes the terrain, paths, and selected objects as input, arranges the selected objects, optimizing their po-sition and rotation. Therefore, the complete garden G is the composite output derived from the chain of agents: 

G = ( T, R, (Os, P )) , (1) where selected objects Os = {o1, ..., o m} with properties 

P = (( xi, y i, z i, r i), ... ), representing position and rotation. 

3.2. Hierarchical Garden Composition 

Challenges. (1) Water-centric spatial organization. Con-ventional landscape procedural algorithms fail to capture the water-centered logic of Jiangnan gardens. As a result, they often produce scattered ponds and unnatural terrain that disrupt the intended harmony between land and water. (2) Exploratory path generation. Existing path-generation methods focus on geometric efficiency or uniform cover-age, neglecting the exploratory routing principles of Jiang-nan gardens. Thus, they cannot reproduce the winding, lay-ered paths that define the authentic visitor experience. To address these challenges, we introduce two agents: (1) Terrain Distribution Agent AT and (2) Road Gen-eration Agent AR. These agents leverage specific garden composition prompts, integrate a water-centric loss to guide the generation and optimization of terrain, and redesign the road scoring mechanism to encourage roads to follow ter-rain boundaries and avoid excessive linearity. 

Genetic Terrain Generation. The Jiangnan garden is generally located in flat terrain areas within urban areas and occupies relatively small sites. Consequently, we adopt a Figure 2. Overview of the GardenDesigner pipeline. GardenDesigner transforms the user input into a Jiangnan garden through Hierarchical Garden Composition and Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement. First, Hierarchical Garden Composition transfers the user input into parameters for terrain and road generation with aesthetic principles. Subsequently, Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement chooses the objects based on the garden knowledge and area information, and then optimization loss is used to get the feasible solution for layout. 

genetic algorithm based on a 2D grid and choose four types of terrain to simulate the landform of Jiangnan garden: Out-side , Waterbody , Land , and Ground , represented as integer numbers. To enable language control, AT is used to gener-ate terrain, which transfers the text input to the parameters and then calls the genetic algorithm with the parameters: 

T = AT(U, K global ), (2) where U is the user input text, and Kglobal is the aesthetic principles. Specifically, we choose four types of terrain pa-rameters: (1) existence, (2) quantity, (3) coverage, and (4) single region coverage. Based on the parameters, the ge-netic algorithm conducts the Crossover , Mutation , and Evo-lution operations for each iteration. Finally, the fitness func-tion is used to select the feasible terrain solution for each it-eration. Most importantly, we introduce a water-centric loss to calculate the terrain fitness as follows: 

Lterrain = f · max(1 −

Pni=0 c(T, (xi, y i)) 

ϕ , 0) , (3) where T represents the generated terrain, f is the factor, c

function is used to judge whether the grid is in water. 

Explorative Road Generation. Given the discretized terrain layout, AR synthesizes roads adhering to Jiangnan aesthetic principles. We integrate cultural priors into a grid-based scoring mechanism and produces smooth spline curves for a realistic pedestrian experience and corridor ar-rangement. First, the agent parses the user instruction U

to generate the parameters, including the number of en-trances and keypoints, the width of the main road, and the road complexity, which jointly determine the roads and en-trances of the garden. The entrances are sampled across all directional boundaries, and then the roads are generated by scoring the grid border and selecting the best solution. Additionally, the path selection process follows the Jiang-nan garden key requirements: (1) the roads can reach most of the garden area, (2) the roads prefer to follow the bor-der, and (3) the roads should avoid excessive warping and straightening. The process is formulated as follows: 

R = AR(S(T, e i,j ), U, K global ), (4) where e is the edge in the grid and S is the scoring function according to the rules and principles. 

3.3. Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement 

Challenges. (1) Rule-based and aesthetic spatial logic. 

Conventional retrieval or constraint methods fail to capture implicit culturally grounded relations in Jiangnan gardens, leading to aesthetically inconsistent layouts. (2) Lack of domain-specific understanding. General LLMs lack garden knowledge, making it hard to reason about the interplay of architectural, structural, and botanical elements, thus failing to produce layouts aligned with traditional design logic. To tackle these challenges, we first annotate the gar-den asset dataset with descriptions encoding expert garden knowledge. Then, we propose a knowledge-embedded asset arrangement mechanism, consisting of knowledge-guided asset retrieval and aesthetic constraints encoding, imple-mented by the Asset Selection Agent AS and the Layout Optimization Agent AC.

3.3.1. Knowledge-Guided Asset Retrieval 

First, we collected a Jiangnan garden dataset, GardenVerse, and then proposed a knowledge-guided agent AS to retrieve assets with expert-annotated garden knowledge. Specifi-cally, we annotated the object assets with additional gar-den knowledge description Ka = {k1, ..., k n} to provide the agents with rich knowledge about the garden objects in Section 4. We encode these annotations into a knowl-edge vector store and query them through a large language model to enforce culturally consistent object selection. To get appropriate objects, we provide the area information 

Iarea = {i1, ...i k} and garden knowledge for LLM, then agent will response a list of object Os = {o1, ...o m} for object arrangement of each area, as follows: 

Os = AS(Q(( V(Ka), o i), U ), I area ), (5) where Q is the query operation, V is the process to vector store, oi refers to each object and i ∈ { 0, ...m }.

3.3.2. Aesthetic Constraints Encoding 

To address the challenge of inconsistent aesthetic con-straints, we set the constraints for selected objects and then optimize the layout according to the constraints. Specif-ically, we define eight constraint types and group them into five semantic categories according to their spatial po-sition, direction relationship with the boundary and ob-jects: (1) Global (edge, middle) indicates the overall place-ment within the entire scene; (2) Position (around, backed up) captures relative placement relationships; (3) Dis-tance (near, far) quantifies spatial proximity; (4) Alignment (aligned) enforces consistent directional orientation among objects; and (5) Rotation (face to) specifies the facing direc-tion of an object toward another. 

Figure 3. The five constraints categories: (a) Global, edge, and middle; (b) Position, around, and backed up; (c) Distance, near and far; (d) Alignment, aligned; And (e) Rotation, face to. 

Optimization. To generate the garden layout, we de-sign five types of optimization loss functions, correspond-ing to different categories of spatial constraints. The po-sition and direction for each object is represented as oi =(xi, y i, z i, θ i) and the bounding box is bi = ( li, w i, h i). We formulate the optimization loss as follows. 

Global Objective is used to decide the global position and optimize objects to the edge or middle of an area: 

Lglo =



max 

 d(oi,e area )−de 

> de

, 0



, if edge ,

max 

 ∥oi−carea ∥− dm 

> dm

, 0



, if middle , (6) 

where earea and carea are the boundary and the center, de

and dm are the threshold value parameters. The d is used to calculate the distance between a point and an area boundary. 

Position Objective loss focuses on the relative position and direction between two different objects: 

Lpos =

(

m (rl − d, 0) + m (d − rh, 0) , if around ,fback · f (oi, o j , θ ), if backed up , (7) 

where m is the max function, rl and rh represent the low and high threshold. d is the distance between two objects. 

fback is the parameter, θ is the front orientation of oj and f

is deciding if oi is backed up oj .

Distance Objective is used to control and adjust the rela-tive distance between different objects: 

Ldis =



max 

 ∥oi−oj ∥− dn 

> dn

, 0



, if near ,

max 

 df−∥ oi−oj ∥ 

> df

, 0



, if far , (8) 

where dn and df are the near and far parameters from object 

oi and another object oj . ϵ is the threshold value parameter. 

Alignment Objective attempts to align objects of the same type for neat and regular local arrangement: 

Lali = max( |xi − xj | − ϵϵ , 0) + max( |yi − yj | − ϵϵ , 0) , (9) 

where x and y are the positions of two objects and ϵ repre-sents the threshold value for alignment. 

Rotation Objective is used to adjust object direction: 

Lrot = frot · I(vi, p (oj , b j )) , (10) 

where vi represents the direction of oi and p is the polygon of bounding box and position of oj . I judges whether a line and a polygon intersect. frot is the scale factor parameter. And the final optimization loss is as follows: 

Lopt = λ1Lglo + λ2Lpos + λ3Ldis + λ4Lali + λ5Lrot , (11) 

where λi∈{ 1,.., 5} are the loss balancing weight. The al-gorithm first identifies the main object and then explores placements for the anchor object. Subsequently, it employs Depth-First Search to find valid placements for the remain-ing objects according to the optimization loss. The whole layout optimization agent is formulated as follows: 

P = AC(Q(( V(Ka), o i, o j ), U )) , (12) where oi and oj are two different objects in the same area from selected objects Os, i! = j and i, j ∈ { 0, ...m }.

# 4. The GardenVerse Dataset 

GardenVerse comprises 132 high-quality artistic 3D assets across three canonical categories: Rock (33), Plant (44), and Architecture (54), including both individual elements (40 .2% ) and pre-composed arrangements ( 59 .8% ) of plants and rocks, enabling flexible retrieval of Jiangnan gardens. 

Collection. We decompose four digital Jiangnan gar-dens into objects, including Liuyuan Garden [42], Yiyuan Figure 4. GardenVerse construction from Internet repositories and manual modeling. We invite experts to modify the architectures and construct object combinations. Finally, garden experts anno-tate the basic information and garden knowledge for assets. 

Garden [44], Wangshiyuan Garden [43], and Heyuan Gar-den [41]. We also collect ancient architectures, plants, and rocks from the 3D Warehouse [40] and PBRMAX [11]. Then, we filter the objects with Northern garden character-istics and retain objects conforming to Jiangnan garden aes-thetics. Additionally, we enforce stylistic consistency of as-sets through mesh optimization and material reassignment. Also, we invite professional garden designers to create a combination of plants and rocks. 

Annotation. After obtaining the assets, we first anno-tate them with basic information, including object name, size, minimum and maximum position, and related file path. Recognizing the limitations of LLMs in domain-specific tasks, we engaged landscape architecture experts to com-prehensively annotate assets. Each object in GardenVerse includes detailed annotations on: visual attributes of ob-jects, spatial compositions and arrangements, suitable sea-son, description, and contextually appropriate placements. More details can be found in the supplementary materials. 

# 5. Experiments 

5.1. Experiment Setup 

Configuration. The garden grid is defined as 20 × 15 and the real garden size is defined as 200 × 150 m2. For the pa-rameters, the weights in optimization loss are λi∈{ 1,..., 5} =

{2.0, 0.5, 1.8, 0.5, 0.5}, and other parameter details can be found in the supplementary materials. We chose OpenAI GPT-5 [29] as the LLM model, file search [28] for knowl-edge embedding, and Unity to visualize. All reported re-sults were obtained with an Intel(R) Core i7-13620H, 16GB memory, and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Laptop GPU. 

Metrics. We evaluate generated Gardens from physical plausibility, structure complexity, semantic coherence, and aesthetic quality. 1. Pathway Score (Path-S) . Path-S is used to determine whether significant plants and buildings can be 

Table 1. Quantitative comparison. We evaluate our method with the baseline method from four metrics: (1) the pathway rationality (Path-S), (2) the diversity of objects (Class-Div), (3) the structural complexity (FD), and (4) text and scene similarity (CLIP-S).                            

> Method Path-S ↑Class-Div FD CLIP-S ↑
> Liu et al. [25] 021.8 ±1.6 1.42 ±0.1 27.4 ±0.1 Ours 8.1 ±2.5 68.3 ±5.6 1.36 ±0.1 27.6 ±0.1

Table 2. VLMs-based comparison. We render garden images and utilize VLMs to evaluate them from rationality, aesthetic quality, and atmosphere via CLIP-A, VLM-S, and QA-Quality.                         

> Method CLIP-A ↑VLM-S ↑QA-Quality ↑
> Liu et al. [25] 52.9 ±1.0 24.9 ±1.2 43.8 ±2.5 Ours 54.2 ±2.0 32.5 ±2.3 53.8 ±3.1

Table 3. Ablation study for object layout optimization. We eval-uate the Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement module by re-moving it, based on three metric perspetives.                        

> Method FD CLIP-S ↑VLM-S ↑
> Ours w/o Arrange. 1.27 ±0.1 27.4 ±0.1 31.6 ±1.1 Ours 1.36 ±0.1 27.6 ±0.1 32.5 ±2.3

reached or viewed along the road: 

Sp =

> n

X

> i=0

min( di

N − ϕ), (13) 

where di is the distance between each key spot architecture and each edge, and the ϕ is the threshold. 2. Class Diversity (Class-Div) . Additionally, we also use Class Diversity to measure the object categories’ diversity: 

Dc =

Pni=0 ci

N , (14) 

where ci is the class number of the generated garden and N

is the whole asset number. 3. Fractal Dimension (FD). We calculate structure complexity [38] as follows: 

Df = − lim 

> r→0

ln Nr

ln r , (15) 

where Nr is the number of self-similar pieces needed to cover the set at scale r. 4. CLIP-Score is used to mea-sure the consistency between the generated garden and the instruction. 5. CLIP-Aesthetic is used to evaluate the aes-thetic score. 6. VLM-Score. We prompt the VLMs to rate the rendered garden image. 7. QA-Quality. We also used VLM-based visual scorer Q-Align [45] to evaluate results. 

5.2. Qualitative Analysis 

Comparison with the Baseline Method. In Figure 5(a), we input the same prompts for the baseline method and Gar-denDesigner to generate different Jiangnan gardens. The Figure 5. Qualitative analysis. In (a), we input the same prompt to GardenDesigner and the baseline [25] to evaluate the generated garden quality with three different views for each garden. In (b), we compare four methods: (1) Baseline [25], (2) Baseline with GardenVerse as-sets, (3) GardenDesigner, and (4) GardenDesigner without Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement to conduct the ablation experiment. 

views from left to right are front, right, and top. The gar-den generated from the baseline method has large areas of vacancies, regular plant distribution, and no necessary ar-chitecture. In contrast, GardenDesigner gets water-centric terrain distribution, explorative road covering most garden area, and the natural garden layout. 

Ablation Study. In Figure 5(b), we conduct the abla-tion study and select two representative areas. Compared to baseline [25], GardenVerse enhances the visual qual-ity of the other three methods, containing abundant objects and natural configurations. After removing the Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement, GardenDesigner achieves a regular layout and limited objects, demonstrating the effec-tiveness of aesthetic principles integration. 

5.3. Quantitative Analysis 

We compare the performance of GardenDesigner with the baseline [25], as summarized in Table 1. GardenDesigner achieves a higher Path-S of 8.1, reflecting more coherent relationships between architectures and roads, whereas Liu et al. [25] produces unreasonable layouts with no valid score. In terms of asset diversity, GardenDesigner generates a wider range of garden object classes from 26 to 71 types, demonstrating greater dynamism. For structural complex-ity, GardenDesigner attains a Fractal-dim of 1.36—closer to real Jiangnan gardens from 1.123 to 1.329 [38], indicat-ing a more natural spatial structure. In addition, GardenDe-signer achieves a slightly higher CLIP-S of 27.6. Finally, we prompt VLMs with the rendered garden images and ask to rate the gardens. In Table 2, GardenDesigner greatly ex-ceeds baseline [25] with all three aesthetic metrics. 

Ablation Study. Removing the Knowledge-embedded Asset Arrangement, GardenDesigner achieves a lower gar-den structure complexity with 1.27, caused by fewer archi-tectures. In addition, GardenDesigner gets more visual co-herence with a CLIP-S of 27.6, , achieved a higher VLM-S of 32.5, validating the aesthetic quality and effectiveness. More experiments are included in supplementary materials.                                   

> Table 4. Selection ratio ( ↑) of different methods for five gar-den types: (1) Baseline [25], (2) Baseline* (Baseline with GardenVerse), (3) Ours* (GardenDesigner without Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement, (4) Ours (GardenDesigner).
> Normal Hydric Floral Arch-dense Mazy Baseline 7.58 7.58 4.54 3.03 7.58 Baseline* 12.12 9.09 18.18 10.61 22.72 Ours* 18.18 40.91 10.61 12.12 19.70 Ours 62.12 42.42 66.67 74.24 50.00
> Figure 6. Comparing the selection ratio of four methods in the experiment from four perspectives: (1) Overall Quality, (2) Text Relevance, (3) Spatial Layout, (4) Cultural Atmosphere.

5.4. Human Evaluation 

We invited 11 garden experts and 32 non-expert volunteers to evaluate the aesthetic quality of the generated Jiangnan gardens. Jiangnan gardens for human evaluation comprise five types in the Table 4. With the chain of agents and knowledge integration, humans prefer GardenDesigner over baseline methods from all perspectives. The baseline method receives fewer selections (all under 10%) compared to other methods adopted with GardenVerse. On the con-trary, the baseline method gets more preference using the GardenVerse datasets, indicating that GardenVerse pro-motes the whole garden quality . We also removed the Knowledge-Embedded Asset Arrangement module to con-duct ablation study. Although two scenes have the same ter-rain and structure layout, layout with aesthetic rules gets more preference , indicating that aesthetic principles play a significant role in determining scene quality. 

5.5. Discussion 

The chain of agents has the potential to generalize to other artistic scene generation tasks. First, by encoding new scene rules and knowledge in textual form, the knowledge-Embedded context mechanism can be directly reused by vectorizing them into semantic memory space. Second, terrain and path generation agents can be adapted to vari-ous landscape typologies by modifying the procedural loss terms and path-scoring rules. For example, European royal gardens can be generated by imposing symmetry-aware op-timization loss and balanced path scoring. 

# 6. Applications 

We developed an interface to allow users to input text and construct a Jiangnan garden in Unity. We also provide a terrain adjustment tool to modify the terrain and output the structure map to assist engineers in the construction of phys-ical gardens. Furthermore, users can input instructions to navigate to a spot of interest in the garden using VLMs, as shown in Figure 7. Our GardenDesigner system can sup-port Jiangnan garden design, virtual tourism, interactive en-tertainment, and virtual reality experiences. 

> Figure 7. Two applications: (a) Generating a 2D garden construc-tion layout, which can be used to build the garden; (b) Navigating to a spot of interest following the user’s instructions.

# 7. Conclusion 

This paper has proposed GardenDesigner , a novel frame-work that encodes aesthetic principles for Jiangnan garden construction and integrates a chain of agents procedurally. By structuring the generation process into hierarchical gar-den composition and knowledge-embedded asset arrange-ment, GardenDesigner ensures spatial rationality and aes-thetic coherence with Jiangnan garden design principles. Looking forward, GardenDesigner can be extended to sup-port interactive educational tools, virtual heritage recon-struction, and personalized landscape design, opening new avenues for cultural heritage preservation and creative ap-plications in digital art and games. 8. Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62402306), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (Grant No. 24ZR1422400, Grant No. 25ZR1401130), the Open Research Project of the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technol-ogy, China (Grant No. ICT2024B72), and the Guang-dong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2026A1515011138). 

# References 

[1] Sherwin Bahmani, Jeong Joon Park, Despoina Paschalidou, Xingguang Yan, Gordon Wetzstein, Leonidas Guibas, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. CC3D: Layout-Conditioned Genera-tion of Compositional 3D Scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 7171–7181, 2023. 2 [2] Zixuan Bian, Ruohan Ren, Yue Yang, and Chris Callison-Burch. HOLODECK 2.0: Vision-Language-Guided 3D World Generation with Editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05899 , 2025. 2 [3] Blender Foundation. Blender. https://www.blender. org , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 2, 3 [4] Ata C ¸ elen, Guo Han, Konrad Schindler, Luc Van Gool, Iro Armeni, Anton Obukhov, and Xi Wang. I-design: Person-alized llm interior designer. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 Workshops: Milan, Italy, September 29–October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part II , page 217–234, Berlin, Heidel-berg, 2025. Springer-Verlag. 2 [5] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Mano-lis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012 , 2015. 2 [6] J. Cheng, A. Hardie, Z. Ming, and M. Keswick. The Craft of Gardens: The Classic Chinese Text on Garden Design .Shanghai Press, 2012. 1, 3 [7] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Eli VanderBilt, Anirud-dha Kembhavi, Carl Vondrick, Georgia Gkioxari, Kiana Ehsani, Ludwig Schmidt, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse-XL: A Universe of 10M+ 3D Objects. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. 2[8] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A Universe of Annotated 3D Objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 13142–13153, 2023. 2 [9] Jie Deng, Wenhao Chai, Junsheng Huang, Zhonghan Zhao, Qixuan Huang, Mingyan Gao, Jianshu Guo, Shengyu Hao, Wenhao Hu, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Citycraft: AReal Crafter for 3D City Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04983 , 2024. 3 [10] Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kin-man, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann, Thomas B. McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google Scanned Objects: A High-Quality Dataset of 3D Scanned Household Items. In 2022 In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,page 2553–2560. IEEE Press, 2022. 2 [11] EcoPlants. PBRMAX. https://pbrmax.com/ , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 6 [12] Epic Games. Unreal. https://www.unrealengine. com/ , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 3 [13] Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Ar-jun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional Visual Plan-ning and Generation With Large Language Models. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. 2 [14] Rao Fu, Zehao Wen, Zichen Liu, and Srinath Sridhar. Any-Home: Open-Vocabulary Generation of Structured and Tex-tured 3D Homes. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29–October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part XXXIX , page 52–70, Berlin, Hei-delberg, 2024. Springer-Verlag. 2 [15] Torsten H¨ adrich, Bedrich Benes, Oliver Deussen, and S¨ oren Pirk. Interactive Modeling and Authoring of Climbing Plants. Comput. Graph. Forum , 36(2):49–61, 2017. 3 [16] Lukas H¨ ollein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2Room: Extracting Textured 3D Meshes from 2D Text-to-Image Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 7909–7920, 2023. 2 [17] Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Aashi Jain, Thomas Kipf, Yisong Yue, David A Ross, Cordelia Schmid, and Alireza Fathi. Scenecraft: An Llm Agent for Synthesizing 3D Scenes as Blender Code. In Proceedings of the 41st International Con-ference on Machine Learning . JMLR.org, 2024. 2 [18] Madiha Jamil. Augmented Reality for Historic Storytelling and Preserving Artifacts in Pakistan. International E-Journal of Advances in Social Sciences , 5(14):998–1004, 2019. 3 [19] Samin Khan, Buu Phan, Rick Salay, and Krzysztof Czar-necki. Procsy: Procedural synthetic dataset generation to-wards influence factor studies of semantic segmentation net-works. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Work-shops , 2019. 2, 3 [20] Kangsoo Kim, Byung-Kuk Seo, Jae-Hyek Han, and Jong-Il Park. Augmented Reality Tour System for Immersive Ex-perience of Cultural Heritage. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry , page 323–324, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [21] Hoang-An Le, Thomas Mensink, Partha Das, Sezer Karaoglu, and Theo Gevers. EDEN: Multimodal Synthetic Dataset of Enclosed GarDEN Scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 1579–1589, 2021. 3 [22] Han-Hung Lee, Qinghong Han, and Angel X. Chang. Nuiscene: Exploring efficient generation of unbounded out-door scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 26509– 26518, 2025. 13 [23] Bosheng Li, Nikolas Alexander Schwarz, Wojtek Pałubicki, S¨ oren Pirk, and Bedrich Benes. Interactive Invigoration: Volumetric Modeling of Trees with Strands. ACM Trans. Graph. , 43(4), 2024. 3 [24] Lu Ling, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yifan Ding, Yu Zeng, Yichen Sheng, Yunhao Ge, Ming-Yu Liu, Aniket Bera, and Zhaoshuo Li. Scenethesis: A Language and Vision Agentic Framework for 3D Scene Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02836 , 2025. 2 [25] Jia-Hong Liu, Shao-Kui Zhang, Chuyue Zhang, and Song-Hai Zhang. Controllable Procedural Generation of Land-scapes. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Con-ference on Multimedia , page 6394–6403, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 6, 7, 8, 14 [26] Xinhang Liu, Chi-Keung Tang, and Yu-Wing Tai. World-Craft: Photo-Realistic 3D World Creation and Customiza-tion via LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15601 ,2025. 2 [27] Quan Meng, Lei Li, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Lt3sd: Latent trees for 3d scene diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08215 , 2024. 2 [28] OpenAI. File Search. https://platform.openai. com / docs / guides / tools - file - search , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 6 [29] OpenAI. GPT-5. https://platform.openai.com/ docs/models/gpt-5 , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 6 [30] Yoav I. H. Parish and Pascal M¨ uller. Procedural Model-ing of Cities. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Con-ference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques ,page 301–308, New York, NY, USA, 2001. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 3 [31] Yigang Peng, Huaiyun Kou, and Ron Henderson. Analysis of the Traditional Chinese Garden . Springer, 1986. 2, 3 [32] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-ing Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Su-pervision. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. 12 [33] Alexander Raistrick, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Lingjie Mei, Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan, Hongyu Wen, Beining Han, Yihan Wang, Alejandro Newell, Hei Law, Ankit Goyal, Kaiyu Yang, and Jia Deng. Infinite Photore-alistic Worlds Using Procedural Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 12630–12641, 2023. 2, 3, 13 [34] Alexander Raistrick, Lingjie Mei, Karhan Kayan, David Yan, Yiming Zuo, Beining Han, Hongyu Wen, Meenal Parakh, Stamatis Alexandropoulos, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, and Jia Deng. Infinigen Indoors: Photorealistic Indoor Scenes using Procedural Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 21783–21794, 2024. 2 [35] Pratheba Selvaraju, Mohamed Nabail, Marios Loizou, Maria Maslioukova, Melinos Averkiou, Andreas Andreou, Sid-dhartha Chaudhuri, and Evangelos Kalogerakis. Build-ingNet: Learning To Label 3D Buildings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion (ICCV) , pages 10397–10407, 2021. 3 [36] Sketchfab, Inc. Sketchfab. https://sketchfab.com ,2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 3 [37] Chunyi Sun, Junlin Han, Weijian Deng, Xinlong Wang, Zishan Qin, and Stephen Gould. 3D-GPT: Procedural 3D Modeling With Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12945 , 2023. 2 [38] Ce Sun, Zhenyu Jiang, and Bingqin Yu. How to Interpret Jiangnan Gardens: A Study of the Spatial Layout of Jiangnan Gardens From the Perspective of Fractal Geometry. Heritage Science , 12(1):353, 2024. 6, 7 [39] Fan-Yun Sun, Weiyu Liu, Siyi Gu, Dylan Lim, Goutam Bhat, Federico Tombari, Manling Li, Nick Haber, and Jiajun Wu. LayoutVLM: Differentiable Optimization of 3D Layout via Vision-Language Models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 29469–29478, 2025. 2 [40] Trimble Inc. 3D Warehouse. https://3dwarehouse. sketchup.com , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 3, 6 [41] Wikipedia. He Garden. https://en.wikipedia. org/wiki/He_Garden , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 6[42] Wikipedia. Lingering Garden. https : / / en . wikipedia.org/wiki/Lingering_Garden , 2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 5 [43] Wikipedia. Master of the Nets Garden. https://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_ of_the_Nets_ Garden , 2025. Accessed, Nov 10, 2025. 6 [44] Wikipedia. Garden of Pleasance. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Garden _ of _ Pleasance ,2025. Accessed Nov 10, 2025. 6 [45] Haoning Wu, Zicheng Zhang, Weixia Zhang, Chaofeng Chen, Liang Liao, Chunyi Li, Yixuan Gao, Annan Wang, Erli Zhang, Wenxiu Sun, Qiong Yan, Xiongkuo Min, Guang-tao Zhai, and Weisi Lin. Q-Align: Teaching Lmms for Visual Scoring via Discrete Text-Defined Levels. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning .JMLR.org, 2024. 6 [46] Tong Wu, Jiarui Zhang, Xiao Fu, Yuxin Wang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Wayne Wu, Lei Yang, Jiaqi Wang, Chen Qian, Dahua Lin, and Ziwei Liu. OmniObject3D: Large-Vocabulary 3D Object Dataset for Realistic Perception, Reconstruction and Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 803–814, 2023. 2 [47] Haozhe Xie, Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, and Ziwei Liu. CityDreamer: Compositional Generative Model of Un-bounded 3D Cities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 9666–9675, 2024. 2 [48] Haozhe Xie, Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, and Ziwei Liu. Generative Gaussian Splatting for Unbounded 3D City Gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 6111–6120, 2025. 2 [49] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Al-varo Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Christopher Clark. Holodeck: Language Guided Generation of 3D Embodied AI Environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16227– 16237, 2024. 2, 12 [50] Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Charles Herrmann, William T. Freeman, and Jiajun Wu. WonderWorld: Interactive 3D Scene Generation from a Single Image. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 5916–5926, 2025. 2 [51] Liang Yue, Shao-Kui Zhang, Lin Yuan, Yi-Tao Chen, Zirui Zhou, and Song-Hai Zhang. Synthesizing 3d scenes via dif-fusion model that incorporates indoor scene characteristics. page 9385–9394, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [52] Guangyao Zhai, Evin Pinar ¨Ornek, Shun-Cheng Wu, Yan Di, Federico Tombari, Nassir Navab, and Benjamin Busam. CommonScenes: generating commonsense 3D in-door scenes with scene graph diffusion. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Asso-ciates Inc. 2 [53] Zaiwei Zhang, Zhenpei Yang, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, Alexander Huth, Etienne Vouga, and Qixing Huang. Deep generative modeling for scene synthesis via hybrid represen-tations. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 39(2):1–21, 2020. 3 [54] Mengqi Zhou, Jun Hou, Chuanchen Luo, Yuxi Wang, Zhaox-iang Zhang, and Junran Peng. SceneX: Procedural Con-trollable Large-Scale Scene Generation via Large-Language Models. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2403, 2024. 2, 3, 13 [55] Jianzhong Zhu, Ruifang Zhai, He Ren, Kai Xie, Aobo Du, Xinwei He, Chenxi Cui, Yinghua Wang, Junli Ye, Jiashi Wang, et al. Crops3d: A Diverse 3D Crop Dataset for Real-istic Perception and Segmentation Toward Agricultural Ap-plications. Scientific Data , 11(1):1438, 2024. 3 GardenDesigner: Encoding Aesthetic Principles into Jiangnan Garden Construction via a Chain of Agents 

# Supplementary Material 

# 9. Implementation Details 

9.1. Terrain Generation Algorithm 

To generate the garden’s terrain, we adopt the genetic al-gorithm on a 2D grid. We initialize the terrain with a ran-dom integer from 0 to 3, representing unused area, water area, land area, and ground area. Roads are selected and combined from the grid borders, which are scored through border positions. Roads will be smoothed through spline curving and choosing the intersection or inflection point as the start and end of the curve. The CLIP model we used to evaluate CLIP-Score is openai/clip-vit-base-patch32 [32]. 

9.2. Hierachical Garden Composition 

In the implementation process, we divide the Chain of Aes-thetic Principles into terrain and structure generation, using a genetic algorithm. Firstly, the detailed prompts of the Ter-rain Distribution Agent ( AT ) are presented in Figure 13. Additionally, we also provide the detailed prompts of the 

Road Generation Agent ( AR) in Figure 14. Based on the response from LLM, we parse the parameters for 2D genetic alogrithm to generate terrain and structures. We choose four types of terrains to simulate the landform of Jiangnan gar-den: Outside , Waterbody , and Land . Specifically, each ter-rain is explained as follows: • Outside areas refer to unoccupied zones and serve to in-crease spatial diversity and boundary complexity. • Waterbody areas present the indispensable and symbolic water area of the Jiangnan garden. • Land areas represent flat land with natural elements. • Ground areas are the flat terrain zone, on which the build-ings, plants, and rocks will be sited. In each terrain grid cell, we employ an integer number (0-3) to represent these terrain types. 

9.3. Knowledge-embedded Asset Arrangement 

To obtain an appropriate garden layout, we decompose the Garden Configuration into object selection and constraint setting. We present the detailed prompt used to select ob-jects for Asset Selection Agent ( AS ) in Figure 15. Before requesting LLM, we annotate each area with area informa-tion. We use the file search tools from OpenAI. After se-lecting the appropriate objects, we also present the Layout Optimization Agent ( AC ) prompt in Figure 16 and Fig-ure 17 , enabling the feasible constraints for objects. All constraints are formalized in a structured representation to ensure interpretability and implementation feasibility:  

> "area name": {

Algorithm 1 Garden Construction 

Require: User input text U , Garden Principles Kglobal , As-set library Oasset with knowledge Ka

Ensure: Complete garden G = ( T, R, (Os, P ) 

> 1:

T ← AT (U, K global ) 

> 2:

R ← AR(S(T, e i,j ), U, K global ) 

> 3:

Os ← AS(Q(( V (Ka), o i), U ), I area ) 

> 4:

C ← AC (Q(( V (Ka), o i, o j ), U ))  

> 5:

for each position panchor for oanchor do  

> 6:

Ptemp ← { panchor } 

> 7:

if DFS-Place (Os, o anchor , C, P temp ) then  

> 8:

if Lopt (Ptemp ) < L opt (P ) then  

> 9:

P ← Ptemp  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return G = ( T, R, (Os, P ))      

> "object name": [["constraint", "type"], ["constraint", "rel object", "type"] ]}

where the “area name” and “object name” are the target area and object, the “constraint” is the relationship between ob-ject and another object with the name of “rel object”, and the “type” is the constraint type. 

9.4. Optimization 

We demonstrate the detailed information in Optimization section. We utilize Depth-First Search (DFS) Solver to opti-mize object constraints from Garden Configuration inspired by Yang et al. [49]. To make the balance between time and quality, we choose to change the area into grid point ac-cording to the area bounding box and we also remove the points of the area. The grid points in the area are presented as the solution for each object position movement. In the DFS solver, each object is characterized by five variables: 

(x, y, l, w, rotation ), where: (x, y ) represents the 2D co-ordinates of the object’s center, l and w denote the length and width of the object’s 2D bounding box. Rotation can take one of four possible angles: 0, 90, 180, or 270, where 0 is forward positive z-direction. The solver applies soft constraints, permitting minor violations to facilitate feasi-ble layout generation. Apart from object constraint, we also hard constraints are enforced to ensure physically valid placements: (1) No object collisions, objects must not over-lap; (2) Area boundaries, objects must stay within the des-ignated space. If an object violates any hard constraint, it is rejected from the current layout. We calculate the overall loss of each objects in validate solution, and select the most feasible solution with lowest loss after 100 iteration steps. 

# 10. GardenVerse Details 

GardenVerse comprises 132 high-quality artistic 3D assets across three canonical categories: Rock (33), Plant (44), and Architecture (54), in Figure 8. In Jiangnan gardens, the combination of plants and rocks stands out as a distinc-tive feature compared to standalone assets, which creates a harmonious interplay between organic vitality and enduring solidity. It includes both individual elements ( 40 .2% ) and pre-composed arrangements ( 59 .8% ) of plants and rocks, enabling flexible retrieval of Jiangnan gardens, in Figure 9.                    

> Figure 8. GardenVerse data examples. The GardenVerse consists of four types of objects: (a) the Architecture, (b) the Structure, (c) the Plant, and (d) the Rock. The plant and rock include both single and combined objects.
> {"name": "object name", "path": "related path", "pos": "appropriate position", "object": "internal object", "season": "appropriate season", "description": "knowledge about object", "minp": "min position", "maxp": "max position", "size": "object size" }
> Figure 9. GardenVerse statistics: (a) the object categories propor-tional distribution; (b) the combined and single objects ratio.

where the text of “description”, “season” and “pos” consti-tute the asset garden knowledge to guide the asset selection and garden layout optimization. 

# 11. Experiments 

We conducted the ablation study in Figure 11(a). The base-line method has worse visual quality than other methods with GardenVerse. The methods with terrain loss and ex-plorative road scoring function have water-centric terrain and reasonable pathway. Furthermore, we evaluate the di-versity of GardenDesigner. In Figure 11(b), we input the same prompt and evaluate the diversity of GardenDesigner to generate different Jiangnan gar- dens. In Figure 11(c), we evaluate the object layout diversity through maintaining the same prompt, terrain, and structure layout. Table 5 shows that the comparison with natural scene generator Infinigen [33], rule-based SceneX [54], diffusion-based NuiScene [22], and PCG method without chain of agents. GardenDesigner outperforms others on all consis-tency and aesthetic metrics, validating the effectiveness. Based on the performance of baseline and PCG meth-ods, both LLM-based reasoning and procedural engineering contribute to the improvement.                            

> Table 5. Quantitative comparison with different methods. Method CLIP-S ↑CLIP-A ↑VLM-S ↑QA-Quality ↑
> Infinigen 18.1 51.6 6.3 24.9 SceneX 23.1 53.1 5.5 37.6 NuiScene 25.6 53.7 10.3 46.3 PCG 27.4 53.9 28.9 51.2 Ours 27.6 54.2 32.5 53.8

We conduct additional loss ablation study to better un-derstand the contribution of different losses. Table 6 shows that all losses will affect the garden structure complexity and visual quality, while global and distance losses con-tribute significantly to visual quality in VLM-S and QA-Quality. The weights for loss components are defined by their contribution to the final performance. Figure 10. GardenVerse dataset. GardenVerse includes a collection of diverse 3D objects specially designed for Jiangnan gardens, and we show object examples from the dataset. GardenVerse encompasses four distinct object categories: architecture, plant, and rock, containing single objects and combination asset forms. Table 6. Ablation study results on optimization losses. Method FD VLM-S ↑ QA-Quality ↑                       

> w/o Lglo 1.39 31.8 48.9 w/o Lpos 1.38 32.2 50.9 w/o Ldis 1.38 31.9 48.6 w/o Lali 1.40 32.3 49.6 w/o Lrot 1.36 32.3 50.3 Ours 1.36 32.5 53.8

# 12. Human Evaluation Details 

12.1. Human Evaluation Setup 

We also invite 11 garden experts and 32 non-expert vol-unteers to evaluate the aesthetic quality of the generated Jiangnan gardens in Figure 12. We prepared 20 Jiangnan gardens for human evaluation, comprising five types of gar-den: (1) Normal, (2) Hydric, (3) Floral, (4)Arch-dense , and (5) Mazy. We ask the volunteers to choose which Jiang-nan garden is better based on four perspectives: (1) Over-all Quality : which method has the best overall quality? (2) Text Relevance : Which method has the highest align-ment with the text? (3) Spatial Layout : Which method achieves the most accurate terrain and object layout? (4) 

Cultural Atmosphere : Which method best captures the cultural essence of Jiangnan gardens? For experts, we add more detailed questions. For Spatial Layout, we add two questions: (1) Which method results in the most reason-able and natural terrain layout? (2) Which approach pro-vides the most logical and organic arrangement for vege-tation and structures?. For Cultural Atmosphere, we also add two questions: (1) Which method best aligns with the design principles of Jiangnan gardens? (2) Which method best captures the poetic essence and philosophical depth of Jiangnan gardens? 

12.2. Human Evaluation Results 

Humans prefer GardenDesigner over baseline . Humans prefer the gardens generated from GardenDesigner com-pared to other methods, with a majority of selection, espe-cially Cultural Atmosphere (49% General Users, 59% Ex-perts). Overall Quality (49% General Users, 58% Experts), Text Relevance (49% General Users, 64% Experts), Spa-tial Layout (45% General Users, 57% Experts) and Cultural Atmosphere (49% General Users, 59% Experts). 

GardenVerse promote the whole garden quality . The baseline method receives few selection compared to other methods adopted with GardenVerse. The selection ratios for all the question in General Users and Experts are all under 10%. On the contrary, the baseline method gets more pref-erence using the GardenVerse datasets, especially among General Users. It gets 22% more selection ratio than the baseline method [25], validating the effects of GardenVerse. 

Layout with aesthetic rules gets more preference . We also conducted an ablation study about Garden Configura-tion. We modify GardenDesigner by removing the Garden Configuration module. Although two scenes have the same terrain and structure layout, the Humans prefer GardenDe-signer more, indicating that Garden Configuration plays a significant role in determining scene quality. 

# 13. Applications 

To visualize the garden, we provide the plugin in Unity, where the user can edit and interact in real time. The output of GardenDesigner are stored as files containing all nec-essary information: the height map for terrain generation, textures to distinguish different terrains, and object infor-mation in json format, in which all of these constructs the Jiangnan Garden. We also develop Unity plug-in is devel-oped to parse these files and convert them into terrain and objects. Additionally, we also provide the terrain adjust-ment tool to modify the terrain boundary and output the structure map to assist garden design and building. Figure 11. Qualitative results. (a) We conduct the ablation study to compare the different methods for garden construction with same user input, and the view from left to right is front view, right view and top view. (b) We input the same user instruction to evaluate the generation diversity of GardenDesigner. (c) We also input the same user instruction and keep the same terrain to generate different gardens. Figure 12. Questionnaire Survey. We conducted human evaluation with experts and no-experts. (a) In non-expert questionnaire, we provide four questions from overall quality, text relevance, spatial layout, and cultural atmosphere for volunteers to answer. And we provide five types of generated Jiangan gardens from four different methods. (b) We refine the question about sptatial layout and cultural atmosphere. Figure 13. Prompts for the terrain generation agent. Figure 14. Prompts for the road generation agent. Figure 15. Prompts for the asset selection agent. Figure 16. First part of prompts for the layout optimization agent. Figure 17. Second part of prompts for the layout optimization agent.