Title: Qwen3-VL-Seg: Unlocking Open-World Referring Segmentation with Vision-Language Grounding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07141v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:47:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
May 11, 2026 

# Qwen3-VL-Seg: Unlocking Open-World Referring Segmentation with Vision-Language Grounding 

Yuan Yao Qiushi Yang Humen Zhong Jiangning Wei Yifang Men Shuai Bai Miaomiao Cui Zhibo Yang 

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group 

## Abstract 

Open-world referring segmentation requires grounding unconstrained language ex-pressions to precise pixel-level regions. Existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) exhibit strong open-world visual grounding, but their outputs remain limited to sparse bounding-box coordinates and are insufficient for dense visual prediction. Recent MLLM-based segmentation methods either directly predict sparse contour co-ordinates, struggling to reconstruct continuous object boundaries, or rely on external segmentation foundation models such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM), intro-ducing substantial architectural and deployment overhead. We present Qwen3-VL-Seg, a parameter-efficient framework that treats the MLLM-predicted box as a semantically grounded structural prior and decodes it into pixel-level referring segmentation. At its core, a lightweight box-guided mask decoder combines multi-scale spatial feature injection, spatial-semantic query construction, box-guided high-resolution pixel fusion, and iterative mask-aware query refinement, introducing only 17M parameters (about 0.4% of the base model). For scalable open-world training, we construct SA1B-ORS, an SA-1B-derived dataset with two subsets: SA1B-CoRS (category-oriented samples) and SA1B-DeRS (descriptive, instance-specific samples). For evaluation, we curate ORS-Bench, a manually screened benchmark with in-distribution and out-of-distribution subsets covering diverse referring expression types. Extensive experiments on referring expression segmentation, visual grounding, and ORS-Bench show that Qwen3-VL-Seg performs strongly across closed-set and open-world settings, with clear advantages on language-intensive instructions and strong out-of-distribution generalization. Evalua-tions on general multimodal benchmarks further show that the model broadly preserves general-purpose multimodal competence after segmentation-oriented adaptation. 

## 1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has significantly expanded the frontier of visual understanding. Beyond image-level question answering and multimodal dialogue, many vision-language tasks require a model to precisely associate linguistic concepts with specific image regions. This capability, commonly referred to as visual grounding , forms a critical bridge between linguistic semantics and fine-grained visual evidence. Recent frontier MLLMs, such as GPT (Hurst et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2025), Gemini (Team et al., 2023; Comanici et al., 2025; Google DeepMind, 2025a;b), and Qwen-VL (Wang et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2025b;a), have demonstrated substantial progress in visual grounding. Through large-scale instruction tuning, these models can localize arbitrary visual entities with natural language instructions, enabling them to move beyond closed-set vocabularies. However, their outputs are still typically limited to bounding boxes, which provide only coarse spatial localization. Such box-level grounding is insufficient for applications requiring precise boundary-aware spatial reasoning, including robotic manipulation, medical image analysis, and fine-grained image editing. A natural next step is therefore to move from box-level localization to pixel-level mask prediction, namely referring segmentation .Existing approaches to extending MLLMs from box-level grounding to pixel-level referring segmentation mainly follow two technical routes. The first couple of MLLMs with external segmentation models, most commonly SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). For example, LISA (Lai et al., 2024), GSVA (Xia et al., 2024), and SAM4MLLM (Chen et al., 2024) use MLLM representations to identify target regions and then invoke SAM or SAM-like decoders to generate masks. Although effective, these decoupled pipelines introduce nontrivial parameter overhead, additional architectural dependencies, and less streamlined deployment. Separately, SAM3 (Carion et al., 2025) studies concept-prompted segmentation within a segmentation foundation model rather than an MLLM-plus-decoder formulation. The second route avoids external 1

> arXiv:2605.07141v1 [cs.CV] 8 May 2026

segmenters by equipping MLLMs with lightweight dense prediction heads or autoregressive mask representations. Examples include Text4Seg (Lan et al., 2024), UFO (Tang et al., 2025), and recent lightweight mask-decoder approaches such as MLLMSeg (Wang et al., 2025a). However, text-based formulations often suffer from discretization artifacts or representation bottlenecks, while lightweight dense decoders still struggle to recover precise boundaries from low-resolution latent features alone. Open-world referring segmentation (ORS) remains under-explored in existing benchmarks and methods. In terms of benchmarks, dominant datasets remain constrained by closed-set vocabularies. Classic Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) (Hu et al., 2016) benchmarks are built around a relatively limited object space, while Generalized RES (GRES) (Liu et al., 2023a) broadens the scope to include multi-target and no-target cases, and ReasonSeg (Lai et al., 2024) advances the paradigm by incorporating reasoning-intensive instructions. Despite these progresses, existing benchmarks fail to fully leverage the open-vocabulary capabilities inherent in modern MLLMs to achieve open-world training and evaluation. Methodologically, existing approaches either rely on heavyweight external segmentation components or still struggle to recover precise boundaries when using compact dense predictors. Moreover, most methods do not directly exploit the grounding priors already present in modern MLLMs. This raises a central question: can we transform the open-world grounding capability of MLLMs into pixel-level referring segmentation without relying on heavyweight external segmentation models? 

To address these limitations, we introduce Qwen3-VL-Seg , a parameter-efficient framework that converts box-level grounding priors of a pretrained MLLM into pixel-level referring segmentation without relying on an external segmentation model. Our key insight is that the bounding box predicted by the MLLM is not merely a terminal output, but a semantically grounded and spatially informative anchor for mask decoding. Consequently, we leverage the box as a structural prior throughout the decoder. Specifically, we design a lightweight box-guided mask decoder with four components: (i) multi-scale spatial feature injection , which enriches intermediate visual features for dense prediction; (ii) spatial-semantic query construction , which fuses box geometry and language features into an object query; (iii) box-guided high-resolution pixel fusion , which converts the predicted box into a differentiable soft gate to inject fine-grained image textures while suppressing background clutter; and (iv) iterative mask-aware query refinement , which feeds first-pass mask evidence back into the query to progressively sharpen object boundaries. In this way, box-level grounding is systematically transformed into mask-level prediction while introducing only 17M additional parameters, accounting for approximately 0.4% of the base MLLM. Towards model training, we utilize existing public datasets including the RefCOCO series (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2016; Mao et al., 2016), LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019), and COCO (Lin et al., 2014) as supervised sources. To further scale open-world referring segmentation, we construct SA1B-ORS 

(Open-world Referring Segmentation), an SA-1B-derived dataset built from a sampled pool of 2 million raw SA-1B images. SA1B-ORS is a composite dataset with two complementary subsets: SA1B-CoRS 

(Category-oriented Referring Segmentation), which converts category-agnostic mask fragments into category-level referring supervision where one expression may refer to one or multiple instances of the same semantic class; and SA1B-DeRS (Descriptive Referring Segmentation), which provides instance-specific supervision with attributes, relations, or contextual cues so that a single target can be uniquely identified. In total, SA1B-ORS contains 1.05 million SA1B-CoRS samples and 1.94 million SA1B-DeRS samples, providing both broad category-level coverage and fine-grained descriptive supervision. To systematically evaluate model generalization, we introduce ORS-Bench , a benchmark suite contain-ing an in-distribution subset ( ORS-ID-Bench ) and an out-of-distribution subset ( ORS-OOD-Bench ). ORS-ID-Bench includes 9,055 manually curated samples across four instruction formats, providing a reliable assessment aligned with the training distribution. ORS-OOD-Bench is designed to probe the limits of model capability and robustness under challenging scenarios by covering six distributional shifts: category, instance scale, instruction complexity, occlusion, lighting, and domain risk. Guided by training distribution analysis, we curate approximately 200 challenging samples per dimension from non-overlapping sources, spanning extreme spatial extents, indirect reasoning, adverse environments, and safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis. ORS-Bench thus offers a rigorous testbed for measuring the operational limits of referring segmentation models. Comprehensive experiments on referring expression segmentation and visual grounding on both public and our curated benchmarks show that Qwen3-VL-Seg performs strongly across both closed-set and open-world settings. The gains are especially pronounced on language-intensive open-world instructions, where precise alignment between semantic understanding and mask prediction is most critical. In addition, the model demonstrates strong out-of-distribution generalization on ORS-OOD-Bench, while additional general multimodal evaluation shows that it broadly preserves general-purpose multimodal competence after segmentation-oriented adaptation. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: 21. We introduce Qwen3-VL-Seg, a parameter-efficient framework that converts the open-world grounding priors of pretrained MLLMs into pixel-level referring segmentation without relying on external foundation models such as SAM. 2. We propose a lightweight box-guided mask decoder that leverages MLLM-predicted boxes as struc-tural priors and transforms them into precise masks through multi-scale spatial feature injection, spatial-semantic query construction, box-guided high-resolution pixel fusion, and iterative mask-aware query refinement. 3. We construct SA1B-ORS, an SA-1B-derived open-world referring segmentation dataset with two complementary subsets: SA1B-CoRS for category-oriented references and SA1B-DeRS for fine-grained descriptive references. 4. We introduce ORS-Bench, comprising ORS-ID-Bench and ORS-OOD-Bench, to evaluate open-world referring segmentation under both in-distribution formats and six distinct out-of-distribution shifts. 5. We conduct extensive experiments on referring expression segmentation, grounding, open-world referring segmentation, and general multimodal evaluation benchmarks, showing that Qwen3-VL-Seg achieves strong performance across both closed-set and open-world settings, with especially clear gains on language-intensive instructions, strong out-of-distribution generalization, and broad preservation of general-purpose multimodal competence. 

## 2 Related Work 

Referring Expression Segmentation. Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) studies pixel-level localization of objects specified by language expressions, with classic benchmarks largely built around the one-expression, one-instance setting. Generalized RES (GRES) extends this formulation to multi-target and no-target cases through the gRefCOCO benchmark, while LISA (Lai et al., 2024) broadens the instruction space toward reasoning-intensive segmentation. These works enrich the expression space of language-guided segmentation, but the dominant benchmarks remain largely human-curated and closed-vocabulary, limiting scalability to open-world entity spaces. 

MLLMs for region understanding and segmentation. A parallel line of work equips MLLMs with explicit region grounding ability. Representative models such as Shikra (Chen et al., 2023) and Ferret (You et al., 2023) support open-vocabulary region understanding, while more recent systems such as Youtu-VL (Wei et al., 2026) suggest that vision-centric supervision can be absorbed into standard MLLM training at scale. Building on these advances, recent methods extend MLLMs from region grounding to pixel-level prediction. SAM-based approaches, such as LISA, GSVA, and SAM4MLLM (Chen et al., 2024), couple MLLMs with external segmentation models to obtain high-quality masks, but inherit the corresponding parameter and deployment cost. Recent progress on promptable concept segmentation, exemplified by SAM3 (Carion et al., 2025), further strengthens this external-model line by extending large segmentation foundation models to concept-prompted segmentation, detection, and tracking. These models provide strong open-world mask prediction capability, but remain architecturally distinct from MLLM-native referring segmentation and preserve the deployment cost of large external segmenters. SAM-free approaches instead rely on lightweight dense heads or unified autoregressive formulations, including PerceptionGPT (Pi et al., 2024), Text4Seg (Lan et al., 2024), UFO (Tang et al., 2025), and MLLMSeg (Wang et al., 2025a). Our approach is also lightweight and SAM-free at inference, but uses a different inductive bias: the MLLM-predicted box is treated as a structural prior for query construction, pixel fusion, and iterative refinement. 

Data for open-world referring segmentation. Existing referring segmentation datasets, including RefCOCO series (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2016; Mao et al., 2016), gRefCOCO (Liu et al., 2023a), and ReasonSeg (Lai et al., 2024), have been crucial to progress, but they are limited in vocabulary, scale, or construction cost. Our work focuses on scalable construction of open-world referring segmentation data from SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023). SA1B-ORS is organized into two complementary subsets: SA1B-CoRS converts fragmented category-agnostic masks into category-oriented referring samples through entity distillation, mask reconstruction, MLLM verification, and caption generation, while SA1B-DeRS provides descriptive instance-level instructions with grounding-based filtering. This dataset organization aligns training supervision with the open-world grounding regime of modern MLLMs. 3Qwen3 LM Dense/ MoE Decoder 

Vision 

Encoder Tokenizer 

> <Seg>

Mask Decoder         

> Locate and segment every
> instance that belongs to the
> following categories
> ”person ", report bbox coordinates
> and masks in JSON format.
> [{“bbox_2d”: [ 142 ,128 ,301 ,422 ], “label”:
> ”person “, ”mask“:
> ”< mask_start >< mask_token >< mask_ end >“,
> {“bbox_2d”: [ 308 ,3,534 ,411 ], “label”:
> ”person “, ”mask“:
> ”< mask_start >< mask_token >< mask_ end >“}]
> BBox

LORA 

🔥 

🔥 

𝑇 !! 𝐵 "#$ 𝑇 %&' 

{𝐹 ()%  

> *

}*+,

> -

Figure 1: Overview of the Qwen3-VL-Seg architecture. 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Overview 

Open-world referring segmentation aims to ground natural language expressions to specific image regions and generate corresponding pixel-level masks. Modern multimodal large language models (MLLMs) exhibit strong open-world grounding ability, but their outputs are typically limited to coarse localization, e.g., bounding boxes. This creates a mismatch between grounding and segmentation: grounding provides coarse spatial localization, whereas segmentation requires precise pixel-level delineation. To bridge this gap, we propose a box-guided mask decoder architected upon a pretrained MLLM, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our key insight is to leverage the grounded bounding box as a structural prior for dense mask decoding, rather than treating it as a mere auxiliary prediction. Concretely, the decoder first enriches intermediate ViT features with lightweight spatial adapters and combines them with multimodal visual embeddings to form a dense memory representation. It then constructs object queries by jointly encoding language semantics and box geometry. To recover fine boundaries, we further introduce a box-guided high-resolution pixel fusion module, which softly gates shallow image features before fusing them with upsampled visual features. Finally, we perform iterative mask-aware query refinement by pooling target-aware pixel evidence from the first-pass mask and feeding it back to the query for a second-pass prediction. Overall, the proposed decoder follows a coarse-to-fine design: the pretrained MLLM provides robust grounding priors, and the box-guided decoder progressively transforms these priors into fine-grained segmentation masks. Given an input image I and a referring expression, the pretrained MLLM provides four types of infor-mation. These include multi-scale visual features {Fl

vis }Ll=1, where the L-th feature denotes the top-layer visual representation; multimodal visual embeddings Tmm ; text-conditioned segmentation token features 

Tseg ; and a grounded bounding box Bbox . Our decoder predicts the final mask: ˆM = D



{Fl

vis }Ll=1, Tmm , Tseg , Bbox , I



(1) where D denotes the proposed box-guided decoder. As illustrated in Figure 2, the decoder consists of four components: multi-scale spatial feature injection, spatial-semantic query construction, box-guided high-resolution pixel fusion, and iterative mask-aware query refinement. 4Conv 

> Conv
> Spatial
> Injection
> Projector
> Projector

𝐹 !"! 

# 𝑇 !! 

# 𝐵 "#$ 

# 𝑇 %&'  

> Fo urier PE
> Projector
> Add&Norm

𝑀 ($,&)   

> Pixel
> Shuffle Pixel Fusion
> Soft mask

𝐹 ()*" 

> Tran sformer
> layers

𝐹 +,$ -. 

𝑄 *"/ 

> (0)
> IoU
> scores
> Query
> Refinement
> Masks
> §3.2.1
> §3.2.2
> §3.2.3
> §3.2.4

𝑇 !! 

> 1

{𝐹 2,*  

> 3

}340

> 5

𝑄 *"/ 

> (6)

Figure 2: Detailed structure of the lightweight mask decoder. 

3.2 Model Architecture 3.2.1 Multi-scale Spatial Feature Injection and Memory Construction 

High-level MLLM features are typically too coarse to support accurate boundary delineation. We therefore extract intermediate visual features and adapt them with a lightweight SpatialFeatureInjector . For each feature map Fl

> vis

, we first project it into the decoder hidden dimension: 

X(l) 

> 0

= Conv 1×1(Fl

> vis

) (2) We then inject local spatial bias through a depthwise branch: ˜Fl = X(l) 

> 0

+ s · GELU 



DWConv 



GroupNorm (X(l) 

> 0

)

 

(3) where s is a learnable scalar initialized to 10 −3. This near-zero initialization keeps the adapter close to an identity mapping at the start of fine-tuning, which stabilizes optimization. The adapted features { ˜Fl }L−1

> l=1

and the projected top-layer feature ˜FL are concatenated and fused by a lightweight convolutional fusion block: 

Ffuse = ϕfuse 

  ˜F1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ˜FL−1 ⊕ ˜FL

 (4) To construct the decoder memory, we project the multimodal visual embeddings and reshape them into a 2D feature map: 

T′ 

> mm

= Reshape (Wmm Tmm ) . (5) The final memory feature is obtained as: 

Fmem = T′ 

> mm

+ Ffuse + Pmem (6) where Pmem denotes a learnable 2D positional encoding and is omitted in Figure 2 for clarity. Flattening 

Fmem yields the transformer decoder memory, which combines language-aligned multimodal semantics with spatially enhanced visual features, providing a dense representation for mask prediction. 

3.2.2 Spatial-Semantic Query Construction 

The object query should capture both target semantics and instance-level spatial identity. We therefore use the grounded box as an explicit conditioning signal during query construction. Let the grounded box be: 

Bbox = ( x1, y1, x2, y2) (7) We obtain the width w, height h from the box coordinates and encode its geometry with Fourier positional encoding γ(·):

Ebox = γ(x1) ⊕ γ(y1) ⊕ γ(0.2 log w + 0.5 ) ⊕ γ(0.2 log h + 0.5 ) (8) 5where the log-scale transform improves robustness to large variations in object scale. The initial object query is then defined as: 

Q(0) 

> seg

= LayerNorm  MLP box (Ebox ) + Wseg Tseg 

 (9) A stack of transformer decoder layers attends to the global memory and produces decoded query features: 

Q(1) 

> seg

= Decoder (Q(0)

> seg

, Fmem ) (10) As a result, the query is jointly conditioned on target semantics and instance-level spatial cues. Rather than relying on language alone to retrieve the target, the decoder starts from a query that already carries a grounded spatial prior. 

3.2.3 Box-Guided High-Resolution Pixel Fusion 

To recover boundary details that are largely absent from high-level MLLM features, we extract shallow image features through a lightweight convolutional stem: 

Fcnn = Stem (I) (11) Directly fusing such shallow features may introduce substantial background clutter. We therefore use the grounded box to construct a soft spatial gate. Given the box coordinates (x1, y1, x2, y2), we enlarge the box by 15% in width and height to tolerate localization errors, producing (x′

> 1

, y′

> 1

, x′

> 2

, y′

> 2

). The resulting gate is 

M(x, y) = σ(α(x − x′

> 1

)) · σ(α(x′ 

> 2

− x)) · σ(α(y − y′

> 1

)) · σ(α(y′ 

> 2

− y)) (12) where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and α = 20. When multiple boxes are available, we take the spatial maximum over their gates. Meanwhile, the fused visual feature is progressively upsampled by a two-stage PixelShuffle module: 

Fup = Upsample (Ffuse ) (13) We then fuse the gated shallow features with the upsampled visual feature: 

Fpixel = Fup ⊕ (M(x, y) ⊙ Fcnn ) (14) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. This design injects high-frequency local details into the decoder while suppressing irrelevant responses outside the grounded region, producing a detail-rich pixel representation with reduced background interference. 

3.2.4 Iterative Mask-Aware Query Refinement 

A single-round mask prediction is often insufficient for thin structures or cluttered scenes. We therefore introduce a lightweight refinement step that feeds mask-aware pixel evidence back into the query. In the first pass, the decoded query Q(1) 

> seg

generates dynamic kernels to predict an initial mask: 

M(1) 

> logit

= Ψ(Q(1)

> seg

, Fpixel ) (15) where Ψ(·) denotes dynamic mask prediction over the pixel feature map. We then use the corresponding soft mask to pool a target-aware feature: 

Ftar = ∑h,w



σ(M(1)

> logit

) ⊙ Fpixel 



∑h,w σ(M(1)

> logit

) + ϵ

(16) where ϵ = 10 −6 ensures numerical stability. The pooled feature is projected and added back to the decoded query: 

Q(2) 

> seg

= LayerNorm 



Q(1) 

> seg

+ ϕref (Ftar )



(17) The refined query is then used for second-pass mask prediction: 

M(2) 

> logit

= Ψ(Q(2)

> seg

, Fpixel ) (18) Finally, the mask logits are upsampled to the target resolution: ˆM = Interp (M(2)

> logit

) (19) In parallel, an auxiliary IoU head predicts the mask confidence from the refined query: ˆsIoU = WIoU Q(2) 

> seg

(20) This refinement loop establishes an explicit interaction between query prediction and pixel evidence, allowing the decoder to correct coarse initial masks and sharpen object boundaries. 6child    

> the person with long red hair wearing a dark
> jacket and holding the man in the brown jacket
> car stone person
> the stone pedestal supporting the statue the person wearing a beige cap and a blue
> "Supreme" backpack, seated in the
> green -and -orange boat
> the string instrument with the largest body size
> and lowest pitch range, supported by an endpin
> on the display floor

Figure 3: Examples from SA1B-ORS. The first row shows SA1B-CoRS, where each category-oriented expression corresponds to one or multiple entities. The second row shows SA1B-DeRS, where each descriptive instruction corresponds to a single entity. 

## 4 Dataset and Benchmark Construction 

4.1 SA1B-ORS 4.1.1 Overview 

To support open-world referring segmentation, we construct SA1B-ORS , a large-scale composite dataset derived from 2 million raw images sampled from SA-1B. SA1B-ORS contains two complementary sub-sets: SA1B-CoRS (Category-oriented Referring Segmentation) and SA1B-DeRS (Descriptive Referring Segmentation), yielding 1.05M and 1.94M samples, respectively. SA1B-CoRS provides scalable category-consistent supervision, where each expression refers to a single semantic category and the target may contain one or multiple entities of that category. SA1B-DeRS complements this setting with descriptive, instance-specific supervision for scenes in which a category name alone is insufficient to disambiguate the target. Together, the two subsets provide both broad category-level coverage and fine-grained instance-level supervision. The selected examples are shown in Figure 3. 

4.1.2 SA1B-CoRS 

SA-1B provides large-scale masks, but its annotations are fragmented, category-agnostic, and not paired with language. SA1B-CoRS converts this raw supervision into category-oriented referring segmentation data through five stages: instance distillation , coarse mask acquisition , fine mask merging , MLLM verification ,and referring caption generation . In SA1B-CoRS, each expression refers to a single semantic category, while the target may contain one or multiple entities of that category. 

Instance Distillation. We first identify reliable referable entities in each image. Since many SA-1B fragments correspond to partial regions, amorphous structures, or non-instance concepts, we begin with open-vocabulary tags from RAM++ (Zhang et al., 2023) and apply hybrid semantic filtering. A label is retained if it belongs to a curated high-priority vocabulary or can be mapped, via WordNet hypernym paths, to referable semantic roots such as person , vehicle , animal , artifact , clothing , food , and structure . Scene words, colors, events, body parts, and other weakly referable concepts are removed. The remaining labels are then verified by an open-vocabulary grounding model. We apply hierarchical non-maximum suppression to preserve specific labels among semantically overlapping concepts while allowing different categories with spatial overlap to coexist. This yields a visually validated entity set: 

O = {(li, bi)}Ni=1 (21) where li and bi denote the entity label and grounded box, respectively. 

Coarse Mask Acquisition. Given the distilled entity set, we construct an initial mask for each target entity or entity set. For each label-image pair, Qwen3-VL-Plus (Bai et al., 2025a) predicts a grounded 7SA1B image source                              

> Instance
> Distillation
> Caption
> Generation
> Coarse Mask
> Acquisition
> Fine Mask
> Merging
> •RAM+ tagging
> •Semantic  filtering
> •Grounding   verif y
> •Hierarchical NMS
> “boat, person, lake”
> •VL Grounding
> •SAM2 mask
> •Frag absorption
> •Pixel -level refine
> Locate and segment
> every instance that
> belongs to the
> following categories
> \”boat \“, report bbox
> coordinates and
> masks in JSON
> format.
> •Caption gen.
> MLL M
> Verification
> •Alignment check
> •Integrity check
> ✅label aligned
> ❌mask incomplete

Figure 4: Illustration of the curation pipeline for SA1B-CoRS. box and SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2024) produces a coarse mask, thereby converting box-level grounding into a mask-level entity hypothesis. This coarse mask is used only as an entity prior to subsequent refinement. 

Fine Mask Merging. SA-1B often splits a single semantic entity or entity set into multiple partial masks. To recover an entity-level mask, we merge SA-1B fragments under the guidance of the coarse mask. Let mp denote the coarse mask and {mkf } the SA-1B fragment masks from the same image. We first discard very small fragments and fragments whose bounding boxes do not intersect the coarse-mask region. For each remaining fragment, we compute IoF (mp, mkf ) = |mp ∩ mkf ||mkf | (22) A fragment is selected if its overlap with the coarse mask is sufficiently high. We use IoF rather than IoU because the key question is whether a small SA-1B fragment belongs to the target entity. Starting from the selected fragments, we merge spatially supported fragments into an entity-level mask and recover nearby uncovered regions from the coarse mask to compensate for incomplete SA-1B coverage. The merged result is further refined by hole filling, morphological cleaning, and connected-component filtering. If refinement causes a substantial area drop, we fall back to the coarse mask. We also remove duplicate candidates for the same label using box and mask overlap. This coarse-to-fine process transforms fragmented SA-1B annotations into cleaner and more complete entity-level masks. 

MLLM Verification. Although mask merging substantially improves the raw SA-1B fragments, the resulting masks may still contain category mismatch, insufficient coverage, contamination from nearby regions, fragmentation, or omission of salient target instances. We therefore introduce an MLLM-based verification stage before caption generation. For each candidate entity, we construct a verification triplet consisting of the original image, a mask-rendered image in which the candidate region is highlighted in blue, and the corresponding candidate label. This triplet is fed into Qwen3-VL-Plus, which assesses whether the mask is sufficiently reliable to serve as supervision for the given label. The verifier checks category consistency, target coverage, non-target contamination, fragmentation, and omission of salient target regions. The criterion is designed for training usability rather than perfect pixel-level completeness: minor boundary inaccuracies are tolerated, whereas masks with substantial omissions, recognizable non-target regions, severe fragmentation, or missing similarly prominent nearby instances are rejected. Only verified candidates are retained for caption generation. 

Referring Caption Generation. After MLLM verification, we convert each retained entity annotation into a language-grounded training sample. For each verified annotation, we use its validated mask, associated label, and grounded box to generate a referring expression paired with the image and pixel-level annotation. Each SA1B-CoRS sample contains an image, a referring expression, the corresponding target mask, and metadata such as category and bounding box. After the full pipeline, SA1B-CoRS contains 1.05M training samples. SA1B-CoRS provides scalable category-oriented supervision, but it does not fully cover cases in which 8visualization Cognitive 

Verification 

Instruction 

Curation  

> MLLM Prompt:
> Compare the two images (original and with red overlay) 
> to identify the highlighted target object. Describe the 
> target object by its distinctive visual or functional 
> attributes that set it apart from other similar objects 
> (e.g., 'the bright red apple', 'the man with a black hat 
> on the right'). Return only the referring expression.

Saliency  

Selection  

> Descriptive Segmentation Instruction: 
> The person on the right pedals a cycle 
> rickshaw. He is wearing a light -colored striped 
> shirt˘ 

Figure 5: Illustration of the curation pipeline for SA1B-DeRS. multiple instances of the same category must be distinguished by attributes, relations, or context. This motivates SA1B-DeRS, a complementary subset for descriptive referring segmentation. 

4.1.3 SA1B-DeRS 

To address complex scenarios where category names alone are insufficient for unique instance identifi-cation, we introduce SA1B-DeRS, which focuses on descriptive referring segmentation. In scenes with multiple visually similar instances, unambiguous reference requires descriptive cues such as spatial relationships or specific attributes. Since publicly available datasets for this task are scarce, as illustrated in Figure 5, we develop an automated pipeline based on the SA1B dataset to generate high-quality descriptive instructions. The construction process consists of three sequential stages: instruction curation, cognitive verification and saliency selection. 

Instruction Curation. We begin by leveraging raw images from the SA1B dataset. For each image, we identify instances of interest and extract their ground-truth bounding box coordinates. To generate rich and discriminative descriptions, we feed the original image, a version with the target mask overlaid, and the instance coordinates into the Qwen3-VL-Plus model. We prompt the MLLM to perform a comparative analysis of the visual inputs and generate descriptive instructions from five key perspectives: category name, target attributes, target state, relative position, and contextual relations. This multi-faceted approach ensures that the generated instructions highlight distinctive characteristics, effectively distinguishing the target from other similar objects in cluttered scenes. 

Cognitive Verification. To ensure the reliability and precision of the generated instructions, we imple-ment a rigorous cognitive filtering mechanism based on MLLM grounding capabilities. The original image and the generated descriptive instruction are fed back into the Qwen3-VL-Plus model, which is tasked with localizing the target referred to by the text and outputting predicted bounding box coor-dinates. We then compute the IoU between these MLLM-predicted coordinates and the ground-truth bounding boxes. Samples with an IoU below the threshold (0.8 in this work) are discarded, as this threshold indicates a failure in accurate grounding. This step serves as a critical quality control measure, ensuring that the descriptive instruction is not only semantically coherent but also precisely aligned with the visual target, thereby filtering out ambiguous or inaccurate referring expressions. 

Saliency Selection. Finally, we apply a saliency-based filter to ensure the selected instances are visually prominent and semantically meaningful. We analyze the distribution of the area ratio between each instance’s segmentation mask and the full image across the dataset. Instances with excessively small area ratios, which often correspond to fragmented, trivial, or noisy segments, are discarded. By retaining only those instances with significant spatial extents, we ensure that the dataset focuses on salient objects that are critical for robust visual perception, reducing noise introduced by negligible background elements. The resulting SA1B-DeRS dataset comprises salient targets paired with accurate, highly discriminative descriptive instructions, serving as a crucial component for enhancing models’ descriptive referring segmentation capabilities. 

4.1.4 Distribution of SA1B-ORS 

We conduct a multi-dimensional statistical analysis to characterize the SA1B-ORS dataset. First, as shown in Figure 6(a), we compare the scale of SA1B-ORS with existing benchmarks. Our dataset significantly surpasses the RefCOCO series and LVIS in both category count and sample size, demonstrating its 9Category Single -ins    

> Category Multi -ins
> Descriptive
> (a) (b) (c) (d)

Figure 6: Statistical analysis of the SA1B-ORS. (a) Comparison of data scale and category diversity against RefCOCO and LVIS, highlighting the superior size and richness of SA1B-ORS. (b) Distribution of the top-20 most frequent categories, illustrating a long-tail pattern consistent with open-world scenarios. (c) Breakdown of instruction types, where descriptive instructions dominate to enhance complex reasoning capabilities. (d) Word cloud of descriptive instructions, emphasizing the prevalence of spatial prepositions and attribute adjectives for discriminative target description. superior categorical diversity. Second, we analyze the class distribution. Figure 6(b) visualizes the top 20 most frequent categories, where common classes such as person, building, and sky dominate, followed by a steady decline in instance counts for other classes. This long-tail distribution aligns with real-world visual data patterns in open-world scenarios. Third, we examine the composition of instruction types. As illustrated in Figure 6(c), SA1B-ORS includes category-based instructions (for single or multiple instance segmentation) and descriptive instructions. Notably, descriptive instructions account for 64.8% of the data; this prevalence is intentionally designed to enhance the model’s ability to interpret complex referring expressions in challenging environments. Finally, to understand the linguistic characteristics of these descriptive instructions, we generate a word cloud (Figure 6(d)). The visualization highlights the frequent use of spatial prepositions (e.g., in , above , left , foreground ) and attribute adjectives (e.g., blue ,

visible , dark , far ). These elements work together to provide discriminative descriptions that accurately locate specific instances within complex scenes. Collectively, these statistical properties establish a robust data foundation for open-world referring segmentation. 

4.2 ORS-Bench 4.2.1 Overview 

To comprehensively evaluate model performance on the open-world referring segmentation task, we construct a high-quality evaluation suite, ORS-Bench , which comprises ORS-ID-Bench and ORS-OOD-Bench . These two subsets are designed to assess the model’s generalization ability under in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) settings, respectively. 

4.2.2 ORS-ID-Bench: In-Distribution Benchmark 

We first develop an in-distribution benchmark derived from the identical data construction pipeline used during training. It comprises 9,055 high-quality samples distributed across four instruction types: single-instance category instructions (2,465), multiple-instance category instructions (1,823), phrasal instructions (2,946), and descriptive instructions (1,821). The category-based instructions are sourced from the public COCO and LVIS datasets, complemented by our self-constructed SA1B-CoRS dataset. Phrasal instructions are curated from the validation splits of RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg, while descriptive instructions originate from our custom-built DeRS dataset. To ensure evaluation reliability, each sample has undergone rigorous manual verification, guaranteeing both the precision of segmentation mask annotations and strict semantic alignment between the referring instructions and their target instances. By encompassing a diverse spectrum of instruction formats with meticulously verified data, this benchmark ensures both the fidelity and representativeness of the evaluation process. 

4.2.3 ORS-OOD-Bench: Out-of-Distribution Benchmark 

To further explore the application scope, capability boundaries, and reliability of our model under risk-sensitive scenarios, we construct an out-of-distribution evaluation set, ORS-OOD-Bench (as shown in Figure 7). This benchmark comprises data types that are either entirely absent or extremely rare in the training set, enabling the assessment of model generalization in challenging real-world scenarios where objects are difficult to recognize or segment. To curate these challenging samples, we first sample data from the training set and employ an MLLM to annotate attributes across multiple dimensions, thereby characterizing the training data distribution. Specifically, we focus on six key dimensions: target instance category, instance-to-image area ratio, descriptive instruction style, occlusion level, image lighting 10 Category OOD:  potholder  Category OOD:  alligator  Area OOD:  pad Area OOD:  cell phone             

> Instruction OOD: The cylindrical vessel, made
> of dark plastic with a reinforced rim and a rope
> handle, positioned on the paved path near the
> person in red pants and used for carrying water
> or soil during the outdoor activity
> Instruction OOD: Can you
> spot the light -blue food truck
> Lighting OOD: bottle Lighting OOD: bowl
> Occlusion OOD: person
> Risk -sensitive: tricycle Risk -sensitive: brain tumor
> Occlusion OOD: person

Figure 7: Examples from ORS-OOD-Bench. The out-of-distribution benchmark consists of six types of challenge and risk-sensitive scene samples, including category OOD, area OOD, occlusion OOD, lighting OOD, instruction OOD, and risk-sensitive scene. intensity, and risk-sensitivity. Guided by this distributional analysis, we select samples from a non-overlapping complementary dataset that exhibit significant distributional shifts across these dimensions. These samples include missing or highly underrepresented data types, designated as OOD instances, which undergo rigorous manual verification to ensure the accuracy of both referring instructions and mask annotations. Through this pipeline, we curate 200 samples for each of the six OOD categories: category OOD , area OOD , instruction OOD , occlusion OOD , lighting OOD , and risk-sensitive scene . Specifically: • Category OOD: We analyze the distribution of object categories in the training set and select categories that are either absent or have a frequency lower than 10 −4 as category OOD examples. • Area OOD: We select instances with extremely small (area ratio < 0.002) or extremely large (area ratio > 0.7) spatial extents. • Instruction OOD: We modify the MLLM-based instruction generation process to produce five challenging styles: (1) indirect descriptions that prohibit direct target naming, (2) instructions with negative or exclusionary constraints, (3) interrogative or interactive queries, (4) prompts requiring complex spatial or inter-object relational reasoning, and (5) lengthy descriptions that embed the target within an extensive contextual background. • Occlusion OOD: We prioritize targets with high occlusion ratios. • Lighting OOD: We select images captured under low-light or nighttime conditions. • Risk-Sensitive Scene: We include domains such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis, which are virtually absent from the training data. We posit that this carefully constructed suite serves as a comprehensive and diverse OOD benchmark for Referring Entity Segmentation. It effectively measures the generalization capabilities and operational boundaries of state-of-the-art referring segmentation models, while providing a standardized testbed to catalyze future research in robust visual grounding. 

## 5 Implementation 

5.1 Multi-stage Training 

We adopt a two-stage training strategy to achieve the simultaneous acquisition of robust multimodal understanding and fine-grained perception capabilities for dense prediction tasks. This progression ensures that the model’s reasoning logic and spatial awareness are optimized in a synergistic manner. 

Stage 1: Segmentation-Centric Adaptation The primary objective of the first stage is to establish a strong referring segmentation capability by exploiting the grounding proficiency already present in the pretrained vision-language backbone. Since the base model can localize objects from natural-language instructions, we repurpose this spatial prior for dense pixel-level prediction. Concretely, we adapt the language model through LoRA, together with the vision encoder and the mask decoder, under a unified instruction-following framework. Using a fixed input template, the model is trained on a mixture of public referring segmentation datasets and SA1B-ORS. During training, the model is supervised to generate structured outputs that contain bounding boxes and mask placeholders, while the mask decoder 11 maps the corresponding mask tokens to final binary masks. This stage bridges coarse-grained grounding and fine-grained mask prediction, while the simultaneous fine-tuning of the vision encoder further improves mask-oriented visual representations. 

Stage 2: Synergistic Enhancement of Perception and Understanding Upon Stage 1, the second stage aims to recover and strengthen the model’s general multimodal understanding and reasoning capabilities while maintaining and further refining referring segmentation performance. We first merge the LoRA weights from Stage 1 into the LLM backbone, and then perform full fine-tuning over the LLM backbone and the mask decoder, while keeping the vision encoder frozen. Training is conducted on a mixed dataset with a ratio of 3:1:2 for referring segmentation, general multimodal understanding, and multimodal reasoning, respectively. For the reasoning portion, we employ the original Qwen3-VL-Instruct model to generate STEM-focused distillation data via off-policy distillation. This stage improves language-centric understanding and reasoning while preserving the visual representations learned in the first stage. 

5.2 Instruction Paradigm and Prompt Design 

To support open-vocabulary capabilities, our instruction-following paradigm strictly adheres to the Qwen3-VL context structure. This approach utilizes the ChatML format, enabling the seamless interleav-ing of multimodal inputs within a structured, conversational framework. 

Instruction Templates We define distinct task-specific templates to differentiate between category-level and description-based segmentation. Depending on the granularity of the instruction, the user prompts are formulated as follows: • Category-based Segmentation: “Locate and segment every instance that belongs to the following categories <category>, report bbox coordinates and masks in JSON format.” 

• Description-based Segmentation: “Locate and segment the object that matches the description <descrip-tion> in the image, report bbox coordinates and masks in JSON format.” 

Structured Output Format To ensure the output is highly structured and machine-readable, the model is constrained to generate a deterministic JSON schema. For each identified instance, the model predicts three key attributes: bbox_2d for normalized 2D bounding box coordinates, label for the category name or identifier, and mask for a specific placeholder (e.g., <mask_start><mask_token><mask_end> ). This placeholder serves as the bridge to the mask decoder for binary mask generation. 

Contextual Conversation Example The following block illustrates the input and output template used during training and inference for a category-based instruction, following the Qwen3-VL protocol: 

Input Template for Category instruction 

<|im_start|>system You are a helpful assistant.<|im_end|> <|im_start|>user <|vision_start|><|image_pad|><|vision_end|> Locate and segment every instance that belongs to the following categories "dog", report bbox coordinates and masks in JSON format.<|im_end|> <|im_start|>assistant 

``` json [{"bbox_2d": [210, 45, 890, 520], "label": "dog", "mask": "<mask_start><mask_token><mask_end>" }]

``` <|im_end|> <|endoftext|> 

12 5.3 Implementation Details 

We utilize Qwen3-VL-4B (Bai et al., 2025a) as our foundational backbone. The newly introduced mask decoder is lightweight, containing only 17M parameters, which accounts for approximately 0.4% of the base MLLM model. This minimal overhead enables precise pixel-level mask prediction while largely preserving the efficiency advantage of the original backbone. In the first stage, we employ LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) with a rank of 32 for 10,000 iterations. During this phase, the original LLM weights are frozen, while the LoRA adapters, the vision encoder, and the mask decoder remain trainable. We employ an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 with a cosine annealing schedule. The vision encoder is assigned a 0.01 ×

differential learning rate to facilitate segmentation-specific adaptation while safeguarding the pre-trained feature manifold against over-optimization and distortion. The model is optimized end-to-end using a hybrid objective that combines text generation loss with a segmentation loss, the latter being a weighted sum of per-pixel Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss and DICE loss (Rezatofighi et al., 2019). In the second stage, the LoRA weights are merged into the LLM backbone, followed by full fine-tuning for 5,000 iterations. In this stage, the LLM backbone and the mask decoder are jointly updated, while the vision encoder remains frozen. We utilize a conservative learning rate of 7 × 10 −7 and a cosine decay schedule to perform this final refinement. 

## 6 Experiments 

6.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We first train on the RefCOCO series (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2016; Mao et al., 2016) for RES and REC tasks. We then further train the model for open-world referring segmentation using a mixed training set consisting of two public datasets, LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019) and COCO (Lin et al., 2014), together with our constructed SA1B-ORS dataset. For evaluation, we use the validation/test splits of the RefCOCO series for RES and REC, and ORS-Bench for open-world referring segmentation. 

Evaluation Metrics. For referring segmentation tasks, we use mIoU (the mean of per-sample Intersection-over-Union), cIoU (the overall intersection-over-union computed across the entire dataset) (Xia et al., 2024), and precision@ t (the percentage of samples whose mask IoU exceeds a threshold t ∈ { 0.5, 0.7, 0.9 }). For REC, following previous work (Lai et al., 2024), a prediction is considered correct if its IoU with the ground-truth box exceeds 0.5 (Prec@0.5). The evaluation protocol differs slightly between single-instance and multiple-instance settings. For single-instance segmentation, the metrics are computed directly from the predicted mask and the ground-truth mask. For multiple-instance benchmarks, we first compute a pairwise IoU matrix between all predicted masks and ground-truth masks, and then use the Hungarian algorithm to obtain the optimal one-to-one assignment. The matched prediction–ground-truth pairs are subsequently evaluated with the same metrics as in the single-instance setting. Table 1: Referring Expression Segmentation results (cIoU) on RefCOCO (+/g) datasets. The models we compared are all MLLM-based methods and the best results are marked in bold. Methods RefCOCO RefCOCO+ RefCOCOg Val TestA TestB Val TestA TestB Val Test LISA LLaVA-7B (ft)(Lai et al., 2024) 74.9 79.1 72.3 65.1 70.8 58.1 67.9 70.6 GSVA Vicuna-7B (ft)(Xia et al., 2024) 77.2 78.9 73.5 65.9 69.6 59.8 72.7 73.3 AnyRef LLaVA-7B (ft)(He et al., 2024) 76.9 79.9 74.2 70.3 73.5 61.8 70.0 70.7 PixelLM LLaVA-7B (Ren et al., 2024) 73.0 76.5 68.2 66.3 71.7 58.3 69.3 70.5 VisionLLM v2 Vicuna-7B (Wu et al., 2024) 76.6 79.3 74.3 64.5 69.8 61.5 70.7 71.2 Text4Seg InternVL2-8B (Lan et al., 2024) 79.2 81.7 75.6 72.8 77.9 66.5 74.0 75.3 SegAgent+SAM LLaVA-7B (Zhu et al., 2025) 79.2 81.4 75.7 71.5 76.7 65.4 74.8 74.9 M2SA LLaVA-7B (Jang et al., 2025) 74.0 76.8 69.7 63.1 67.2 56.1 67.0 68.3 UFO InternVL2-8B (Tang et al., 2025) 78.0 79.7 75.6 72.3 76.8 66.6 73.7 74.3 MLLMSeg InternVL2.5-4B (Wang et al., 2025a) 79.5 81.4 77.7 75.4 78.7 70.8 78.1 78.4 

SAM3 (Carion et al., 2025) 75.5 77.6 71.0 67.3 71.1 63.4 73.4 74.0 Unipixel Qwen2.5-VL-3B 80.5 82.6 76.9 74.3 78.9 68.4 76.3 77.0 Youtu-VL 4B (Wang et al., 2025a) 80.7 82.0 78.4 76.2 79.6 71.4 76.5 76.6 Qwen3-VL-Seg 4B (Ours) 82.3 83.7 79.1 76.2 80.2 70.8 78.2 78.1 13 6.2 Referring Expression Segmentation 

We evaluate Qwen3-VL-Seg on the standard RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg benchmarks using cIoU. As shown in Table 1, our model achieves the best results on 6 of the 8 evaluation splits, reaching 82.3/83.7/79.1 on RefCOCO, 76.2/80.2/70.8 on RefCOCO+, and 78.2/78.1 on RefCOCOg. Compared with SAM-based methods, Qwen3-VL-Seg consistently delivers higher mask quality without relying on an external segmentation model. For example, it surpasses LISA by 7.4 points on RefCOCO Val and 12.7 points on RefCOCO+ TestB, and exceeds SegAgent+SAM by 3.1 points and 5.4 points on the same splits, respectively. The comparison with SAM3 is also notable: Qwen3-VL-Seg improves from 63.4 to 70.8 on RefCOCO+ TestB and from 74.0 to 78.1 on RefCOCOg Test, suggesting that for referring expression segmentation, MLLM-based grounding and language understanding remain more decisive than the generic concept-segmentation capability of pure segmentation foundation models. Among SAM-free alternatives, Qwen3-VL-Seg remains highly competitive across all benchmarks and outperforms Unipixel, which also adopts a Qwen-family backbone, by 1.8 points on RefCOCO Val and 1.3 points on RefCOCO+ TestA. These gains indicate that explicitly treating the predicted box as a structural prior provides more effective spatial constraints than a fully unified pixel-prediction formulation. Moreover, Qwen3-VL-Seg remains more accurate and substantially more parameter-efficient than 8B models such as UFO and Text4Seg, demonstrating that the proposed box-guided mask decoder can recover high-quality masks within a compact 4B framework. Table 2: Referring Expression Comprehension results (Prec@0.5) on RefCOCO (+/g) datasets. The table compares Vision Generalist Models, General-purpose MLLMs, and existing MLLM-based RES methods. Best results in each setting are marked in bold. Methods RefCOCO RefCOCO+ RefCOCOg Val TestA TestB Val TestA TestB Val Test 

Vision Generalist Models 

Florence-2 (Xiao et al., 2024) 93.4 95.3 92.0 88.3 92.9 83.6 91.2 91.7 

Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) 90.6 93.2 88.2 82.8 89.0 75.9 86.1 87.0 

General-purpose MLLMs 

InternVL-3.5 4B(Wang et al., 2025b) 92.5 94.3 88.2 87.6 92.3 81.6 89.6 89.3 Qwen2.5-VL 3B(Bai et al., 2025a) 89.1 91.7 84.0 82.4 88.0 74.1 85.2 85.7 Qwen3-VL 4B(Bai et al., 2025a) 90.7 92.2 86.7 82.9 89.4 75.6 87.3 87.7 Youtu-VL 4B(Wei et al., 2026) 93.6 95.2 90.8 90.1 93.9 85.4 92.2 92.9 

MLLM-based RES methods 

LISA LLaVA-7B (ft)(Lai et al., 2024) 85.4 88.8 82.6 74.2 79.5 68.4 79.3 80.4 GSVA Vicuna-7B (ft)(Xia et al., 2024) 86.3 89.2 83.8 72.8 78.8 68.0 81.6 81.8 PixelLM LLaVA-7B (Ren et al., 2024) 89.8 92.2 86.4 83.2 87.0 78.9 84.6 86.0 VisionLLM v2 Vicuna-7B (Wu et al., 2024) 87.9 91.2 84.3 77.6 83.8 70.2 82.9 84.1 Text4Seg InternVL2-8B (Lan et al., 2024) 90.3 93.4 87.5 85.2 89.9 79.5 85.4 85.4 UFO InternVL2-8B (Tang et al., 2025) 91.4 93.8 88.2 85.7 90.7 79.7 86.8 87.4 MLLMSeg InternVL2.5-4B (Wang et al., 2025a) 91.6 93.3 87.6 86.0 90.0 79.8 88.3 88.6 Qwen3-VL-Seg 4B (Ours) 92.7 94.6 89.8 87.8 92.1 82.2 89.1 89.0 6.3 Referring Expression Comprehension. 

As summarized in Table 2, Qwen3-VL-Seg achieves state-of-the-art performance among all MLLM-based RES methods while remaining highly competitive against specialized Vision Generalist Models and large-scale MLLMs. Compared to Vision Generalists , our model consistently outperforms Grounding DINO across all benchmarks and narrows the performance gap with Florence-2 to a marginal difference. Within the General-purpose MLLMs category, Qwen3-VL-Seg exhibits robust grounding proficiency, surpassing InternVL-3.5 on several key splits and following closely behind the state-of-the-art Youtu-VL. Notably, Qwen3-VL-Seg shows a significant performance leap over its foundational backbone, Qwen3-VL, across all benchmarks. While the backbone provides the essential grounding capability, our results indicate that the referring segmentation task acts as a powerful dense supervisor that further sharpens spatial accuracy. Specifically, we observe a consistent improvement in Prec@0.5, such as the increase from 90.7% to 92.7% on RefCOCO Val and a substantial 6.6% jump on RefCOCO+ TestB. This suggests that pixel-level supervision encourages a tighter semantic-spatial alignment, effectively refining the backbone’s inherent grounding ability through more granular feature optimization. 14 Input Gemini2.5 -pro Gemini3 -flash Seed2.0 pro UFO Youtu -VL SAM3 Qwen3 -VL -Seg 

> shirt
> tower
> elephant
> dress
> cat
> blanket
> GT

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison results of open-world referring segmentation with single-instance category instructions. The predicted mask is overlayed on the input image in red for visualization. Table 3: Open-world Referring Segmentation results (cIoU and precision@0.5) on the proposed ORS-ID-Bench. Best results in each setting are marked in bold. 

Methods Single-instance Multiple-instance Phrasal Descriptive Category Instruct Category Instruct Instruct Instruct cIoU p@0.5 cIoU p@0.5 cIoU p@0.5 cIoU p@0.5 Gemini-2.5-pro (Comanici et al., 2025) 77.7 85.1 75.9 83.8 58.7 73.1 44.6 45.4 Gemini-3.0-flash (Google DeepMind, 2025a) 67.3 71.1 62.1 58.5 51.6 61.2 57.2 70.9 Seed-2.0-pro (ByteDance Seed Team, 2025) 65.4 69.9 66.4 73.0 63.8 80.7 61.0 74.7 Youtu-VL 4B (Wang et al., 2025a) 77.6 86.4 - - 53.2 69.0 69.3 76.0 UFO InternVL2.5-8B (Tang et al., 2025) 72.4 83.7 - - 52.1 67.2 73.7 70.9 SAM3 (Carion et al., 2025) 94.2 97.3 94.6 91.4 66.6 79.1 75.5 78.2 

Qwen3-VL-Seg 96.0 97.4 93.2 91.6 82.8 94.3 91.0 91.3 

6.4 Open-world Referring Segmentation Quantitative Evaluation. Table 3 reports results on ORS-ID-Bench, which evaluates in-distribution open-world referring segmentation under four instruction formats: single-instance category instructions, multiple-instance category instructions, phrasal instructions, and descriptive instructions. Qwen3-VL-Seg achieves the best performance in 7 out of 8 metrics, reaching 96.0/97.4 on single-instance category instructions, 93.2/91.6 on multiple-instance category instructions, 82.8/94.3 on phrasal instructions, and 91.0/91.3 on descriptive instructions in terms of cIoU/P@0.5. These results indicate that the proposed framework remains strong not only on category-oriented grounding but also on more flexible referring formats that require tighter alignment between language understanding and mask prediction. In category-oriented settings, SAM3 is the strongest competing baseline, achieving 94.2 cIoU and 97.3 P@0.5 on single-instance instructions, and 94.6 cIoU and 91.4 P@0.5 on multiple-instance instructions. Qwen3-VL-Seg outperforms SAM3 on all single-instance metrics and attains the best P@0.5 in the multiple-instance setting, while trailing slightly in multiple-instance cIoU by 1.4 points. This comparison suggests that large segmentation foundation models remain highly competitive when the instruction is closely aligned with visual concepts, but our box-guided MLLM-native design can match or exceed their precision without introducing an external segmenter. The more decisive advantage of Qwen3-VL-Seg appears in language-intensive settings. On phrasal 15 bed        

> cistern
> spire
> farmer
> duck
> toy
> Input Gemini2.5 -pro Gemini3 -flash Seed2.0 pro SAM3 Qwen3 -VL -Seg GT

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison results of open-world referring segmentation with multiple-instance category instructions. The predicted multiple masks are overlayed on the input image with different colors for visualization. instructions, our model surpasses the best baseline by 19.0 cIoU points and 13.6 P@0.5 points. On descriptive instructions, it further improves over the strongest baseline by 15.5 cIoU points and 13.1 P@0.5 points. In contrast, both general-purpose MLLMs and segmentation-centric models exhibit a pronounced performance drop once the target can no longer be specified by a simple category name alone. We attribute this gain to the fact that Qwen3-VL-Seg directly converts MLLM grounding priors into dense masks, allowing linguistic semantics, box-level localization, and pixel-level refinement to be optimized within a unified framework. 

Qualitative Evaluation. Figure 8 and Figure 9 present qualitative comparisons on single-instance and multiple-instance category instructions, respectively. We compare three distinct architectural paradigms: general-purpose Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) such as Gemini-2.5-pro, Gemini-3-flash, and Seed-2.0 Pro; unified generalist perception models such as UFO and Youtu-VL; and the specialized segmentation foundation model SAM3. Since UFO and Youtu-VL do not support multiple-instance segmentation, we omit them from Figure 9. While the general-purpose MLLMs demonstrate reliable semantic localization, their predicted masks often lack the pixel-level resolution required to delineate complex boundaries, as illustrated by cases such as the elephant and blanket examples for Gemini and Seed. In contrast, although unified generalist models and specialized segmentation frameworks often produce higher-quality masks, they may still exhibit inconsistencies in instance coverage or semantic grounding under diverse open-world category instructions, as shown by cases such as shirt for UFO and Youtu-VL, and cistern and farmer for SAM3. Qwen3-VL-Seg combines the grounding capability of a strong vision-language backbone with the boundary recovery capacity of the proposed box-guided mask decoder. As a result, its predicted masks remain semantically aligned with the referring instruction while preserving accurate object geometry and boundary detail across diverse scenarios. This combina-tion yields consistently stronger robustness and fidelity than both unified generalist architectures and specialized segmentation models. Figure 10 further presents qualitative results on phrasal and descriptive instructions. The visualizations show that Qwen3-VL-Seg excels at both precise spatial reasoning and fine-grained part-level grounding, effectively resolving complex referring instructions that remain challenging for existing models. Compet-ing methods often struggle with relative positioning or sub-object-level descriptions, such as identifying the "second bottle from the bottom" or isolating the "elevated water cannon" of a fire truck, whereas our model consistently achieves accurate localization and sharp pixel-level segmentation. By combining 16 Input Gemini2.5pro Gemini3flash Seed2.0pro UFO Youtu -VL SAM3 Qwen3 -VL -Seg                                                               

> the person wearing adark
> hooded jacket and carrying
> alarge grey tote bag,
> walking on the right
> sidewalk near the traffic
> light pole
> the red fire truck's elevated
> water cannon and roof -
> mounted piping assembly
> the large horizontal blue
> billboard with white
> Japanese text "ふ と ん ク
> リーナー レイコップ "
> The red umbrella below
> beer bottle, second
> from the bottom
> man right in brown jacket
> bottom black laptop
> The central ornate
> Chinese -style roof with
> upturned eaves and finials,
> positioned directly above
> the blue and yellow sign .

GT Figure 10: Qualitative comparison results of open-world referring segmentation with phrasal and descriptive instructions. The predicted mask is overlayed on the input image in red for visualization. robust linguistic understanding with the proposed box-guided mask decoder, Qwen3-VL-Seg produces masks that are both semantically grounded and geometrically precise, even for highly localized targets in cluttered open-world scenes. 

6.5 OOD Referring Segmentation 

To evaluate the generalization capability of Qwen3-VL-Seg in challenging scenarios, we conduct a comprehensive assessment and comparison of various methods on our constructed ORS-OOD-Bench benchmark. As illustrated in Figure 11, Qwen3-VL-Seg achieves cIoU scores of 53.49%, 59.30%, 86.22%, 78.9%, 83.45%, and 8.64% across six categories of OOD scenarios, including category, area, instruction, lighting, occlusion, and risk-sensitive scenes, respectively. These results significantly outperform other frontier MLLMs and unified generalist perception models. This demonstrates that our approach retains superior generalization capabilities, even when encountering novel, unseen scenarios and challenging, difficult data samples. Despite outperforming current state-of-the-art methods in OOD settings, all methods exhibit a notable performance drop compared to their results on the ORS-ID-Bench. This decline is particularly pronounced in risk-sensitive scenes, such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis, where nearly all methods failed to achieve accurate identification and segmentation. This observation highlights that future referring segmentation models must further enhance their out-of-distribution generalization capabilities to continuously expand the boundaries of model adaptability for diverse application scenarios. 

6.6 General Multimodal Evaluation 

To further assess how the proposed multi-stage training strategy affects general-purpose multimodal competence, we evaluate the original Qwen3-VL-4B instruct model together with its stage-1 and stage-2 variants on a diverse suite of benchmarks spanning visual question answering, multimodal reasoning, OCR-intensive understanding, and visual grounding. Table 4 reveals a stage-wise trend that closely mirrors the training objectives described in Section 5.1 and Section 5.1. After the segmentation-centric adaptation of Stage 1, the model improves on perception-oriented tasks such as MMBench-EN and RefCOCO val , but exhibits broader regressions on several reasoning- and OCR-intensive benchmarks, indicating that dense segmentation supervision and vision-encoder adaptation shift the model toward stronger spatial specialization. The second stage largely restores this balance. By reintroducing gen-17 Figure 11: Comparison of OOD Referring Segmentation on ORS-OOD-Bench. Table 4: Result comparison of Qwen3-VL-Seg with the existing MLLMs on various general-purpose multimodal benchmarks 

Benchmarks InternVL-3.5 4B Qwen3-VL 4B (instruct) Qwen3-VL 4B (S-1) Qwen3-VL-Seg 4B (S-2) 

General VQA 

MMStar 65.0 69.8 67.5 67.7 MMBench-EN 80.3 83.9 86.2 84.2 

Multimodal Reasoning & Math 

MMMU val 66.6 67.4 63.4 66.2 MMMU-Pro – 53.2 51.5 51.3 MathVision – 51.6 47.9 50.4 MathVista mini 77.1 73.7 70.9 75.5 

OCR-related Understanding 

AI2D test 82.6 84.1 81.6 79.7 InfoVQA val 78.0 80.3 75.2 81.4 

DocVQA val 92.4 95.3 93.8 94.1 CharXiv RQ 39.6 39.7 38.9 45.2 

RealWorldQA 66.3 70.9 68.0 71.2 

Visual Grounding 

RefCOCO val 92.5 91.6 91.8 92.3 eral multimodal understanding and reasoning data while keeping the vision encoder frozen, the final Qwen3-VL-Seg model recovers markedly over the stage-1 variant on MMStar, MMMU val , MathVision, MathVista mini , InfoVQA val , DocVQA val , CharXiv RQ , RealWorldQA, and RefCOCO val . It remains particu-larly strong on OCR- and grounding-related tasks, achieving 81.4 on InfoVQA val , 45.2 on CharXiv RQ ,71.2 on RealWorldQA, and 92.3 on RefCOCO val , which are superior to the compared 4B-scale baselines. Overall, these results suggest that the proposed two-stage recipe yields a favorable rebalancing of model capabilities, with the first stage injecting segmentation-oriented spatial specialization and the second stage restoring a stronger balance between fine-grained perception and general multimodal understanding. 

6.7 Ablation studies Ablation on segmentation architecture. Table 5 presents an ablation study of our segmentation ar-chitecture on the RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg validation sets. Compared with the Qwen box+SAM baseline, both the full model and its ablated variants achieve substantial gains across all metrics, confirming the effectiveness of the proposed box-guided decoder in converting MLLM grounding outputs into accurate pixel-level masks. Notably, the full model improves the strict P@0.9 metric from 39.6 to 50.2 on RefCOCO, from 36.7 to 47.6 on RefCOCO+, and from 35.9 to 47.3 on RefCOCOg. The ablated variants further clarify the contribution of each component. Freezing the vision encoder (Ours (freeze vit) ) consistently degrades performance, particularly on the high-threshold P@0.9 metric (e.g., 18 Table 5: Ablation experiments on RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg (VAL) datasets. 

Dataset Method mIoU cIoU P@0.5 (%) P@0.7 (%) P@0.9 (%) 

RefCOCO (VAL) Qwen box+SAM 74.3 70.3 83.2 76.9 39.6 Ours (freeze vit) 81.8 80.9 92.8 87.0 44.1 Ours (w/o multivit) 82.7 81.9 92.7 88.7 49.0 Ours (w/o image) 82.7 81.9 92.8 88.7 48.0 

Ours 82.8 82.3 92.8 88.7 50.2 

RefCOCO+ (VAL) Qwen box+SAM 69.3 66.0 76.9 70.8 36.7 Ours (freeze vit) 78.5 75.5 88.3 83.0 42.5 Ours (w/o multivit) 77.7 75.4 87.2 83.6 46.2 Ours (w/o image) 77.5 75.3 87.1 83.5 46.1 

Ours 78.5 76.0 87.8 84.1 47.6 

RefCOCOg (VAL) Qwen box+SAM 72.9 71.0 81.6 72.8 35.9 Ours (freeze vit) 78.3 78.4 87.7 81.2 43.8 Ours (w/o multivit) 78.1 77.4 86.8 81.5 47.1 Ours (w/o image) 77.8 76.8 87.0 81.0 46.1 

Ours 78.6 78.2 88.0 82.6 47.3 

a 6.1-point drop on RefCOCO), indicating that adapting the visual backbone is important for learning segmentation-oriented representations beyond coarse grounding. Similarly, removing multi-scale visual features ( Ours (w/o multivit) ) leads to consistent drops in cIoU and P@0.9, suggesting that intermediate visual features provide useful spatial detail beyond the top-layer representation alone. The shallow image branch also consistently contributes: removing it ( Ours (w/o image) ) hurts performance across all three datasets, showing that direct high-resolution image cues help recover more precise object boundaries. Notably, the performance gap between the full model and the ablated variants is most evident on P@0.9, which is the most sensitive metric to boundary quality. This suggests that, while coarse localization can already be achieved with fewer components, multi-scale feature injection and the high-resolution image branch are particularly important for improving mask precision and completeness. Overall, the results show that the proposed components are complementary and that their combination yields the most consistent segmentation performance. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We present Qwen3-VL-Seg, a lightweight framework for open-world referring segmentation that extends the pretrained MLLM from box-level grounding to pixel-level mask prediction. The key idea is to treat the MLLM-predicted box as a structural prior for mask decoding, enabling precise segmentation without relying on external segmentation foundation models. To support scalable training and evaluation, we construct the SA1B-ORS training dataset, with complementary category-oriented and descriptive subsets, and introduce ORS-Bench for in-distribution and out-of-distribution assessment of open-world referring segmentation. Experiments on referring expression segmentation, visual grounding, and open-world benchmarks indicate that Qwen3-VL-Seg performs strongly across both closed-set and open-world settings, with especially clear gains on language-intensive instructions and strong out-of-distribution generalization. Additional general multimodal evaluation shows that the model broadly preserves general-purpose multimodal competence after segmentation-oriented adaptation. These findings suggest that reusing MLLM grounding outputs as structural priors provides an effective path toward unified and efficient referring segmentation. 

## References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, 19 Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 , 2025a. Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 ,2025b. ByteDance Seed Team. Seed 2.0 model card. Model card, ByteDance, 2025. URL 

https://lf3-static.bytednsdoc.com/obj/eden-cn/lapzild-tss/ljhwZthlaukjlkulzlp/seed2/ 0214/Seed2.0%20Model%20Card.pdf .Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chai-tanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, et al. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 , 2025. Keqin Chen, Zhao Zhang, Weili Zeng, Richong Zhang, Feng Zhu, and Rui Zhao. Shikra: Unleashing multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195 , 2023. Yi-Chia Chen, Wei-Hua Li, Cheng Sun, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Chu-Song Chen. Sam4mllm: Enhance multi-modal large language model for referring expression segmentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 323–340. Springer, 2024. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 flash model card. https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/ Model-Cards/Gemini-3-Flash-Model-Card.pdf , 2025a. Accessed: 2025-02-14. Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 pro model card. Model card, Google DeepMind, 2025b. URL https: //storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/Model-Cards/Gemini-3-Pro-Model-Card.pdf .Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Lvis: A dataset for large vocabulary instance segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5356–5364, 2019. Junwen He, Yifan Wang, Lijun Wang, Huchuan Lu, Jun-Yan He, Jin-Peng Lan, Bin Luo, and Xuansong Xie. Multi-modal instruction tuned llms with fine-grained visual perception. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 13980–13990, 2024. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . OpenReview.net, 2022. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9 .Ronghang Hu, Marcus Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. Segmentation from natural language expressions. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 108–124. Springer, 2016. Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 ,2024. Donggon Jang, Yucheol Cho, Suin Lee, Taehyeon Kim, and Dae-Shik Kim. Mmr: A large-scale benchmark dataset for multi-target and multi-granularity reasoning segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13881 ,2025. Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara Berg. Referitgame: Referring to objects in photographs of natural sceneteam2023geminis. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pp. 787–798, 2014. Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything. 

arXiv:2304.02643 , 2023. Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Yanwei Li, Yuhui Yuan, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Lisa: Reasoning segmentation via large language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9579–9589, 2024. 20 Mengcheng Lan, Chaofeng Chen, Yue Zhou, Jiaxing Xu, Yiping Ke, Xinjiang Wang, Litong Feng, and Wayne Zhang. Text4seg: Reimagining image segmentation as text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09855 , 2024. Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. Chang Liu, Henghui Ding, and Xudong Jiang. Gres: Generalized referring expression segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 23592–23601, 2023a. Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499 , 2023b. Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana Camburu, Alan L Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. Generation and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 11–20, 2016. Renjie Pi, Lewei Yao, Jiahui Gao, Jipeng Zhang, and Tong Zhang. Perceptiongpt: Effectively fusing visual perception into llm. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 27124–27133, 2024. Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2408.00714 .Zhongwei Ren, Zhicheng Huang, Yunchao Wei, Yao Zhao, Dongmei Fu, Jiashi Feng, and Xiaojie Jin. Pixellm: Pixel reasoning with large multimodal model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 26374–26383, 2024. Hamid Rezatofighi, Nathan Tsoi, JunYoung Gwak, Amir Sadeghian, Ian Reid, and Silvio Savarese. Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding box regression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 658–666, 2019. Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaugh-lin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 , 2025. Hao Tang, Chenwei Xie, Haiyang Wang, Xiaoyi Bao, Tingyu Weng, Pandeng Li, Yun Zheng, and Liwei Wang. Ufo: A unified approach to fine-grained visual perception via open-ended language interface. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01342 , 2025. Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Jingchao Wang, Zhijian Wu, Dingjiang Huang, Yefeng Zheng, and Hong Wang. Unlocking the poten-tial of mllms in referring expression segmentation via a light-weight mask decoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04107 , 2025a. Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, et al. Internvl3. 5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 , 2025b. Zhixiang Wei, Yi Li, Zhehan Kan, Xinghua Jiang, Zuwei Long, Shifeng Liu, Hongze Shen, Wei Liu, Xiaoyu Tan, Haojia Lin, et al. Youtu-vl: Unleashing visual potential via unified vision-language supervision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.19798 , 2026. Jiannan Wu, Muyan Zhong, Sen Xing, Zeqiang Lai, Zhaoyang Liu, Zhe Chen, Wenhai Wang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Tong Lu, et al. Visionllm v2: An end-to-end generalist multimodal large language model for hundreds of vision-language tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:69925–69975, 2024. 21 Zhuofan Xia, Dongchen Han, Yizeng Han, Xuran Pan, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Gsva: Generalized segmentation via multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3858–3869, 2024. Bin Xiao, Haiping Wu, Weijian Xu, Xiyang Dai, Houdong Hu, Yumao Lu, Michael Zeng, Ce Liu, and Lu Yuan. Florence-2: Advancing a unified representation for a variety of vision tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4818–4829, 2024. Haoxuan You, Haotian Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xianzhi Du, Bowen Zhang, Zirui Wang, Liangliang Cao, Shih-Fu Chang, and Yinfei Yang. Ferret: Refer and ground anything anywhere at any granularity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07704 , 2023. Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context in referring expressions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 69–85. Springer, 2016. Youcai Zhang, Xinyu Huang, Jinyu Ma, Zhaoyang Li, Zhaochuan Luo, Yanchun Xie, Yuzhuo Qin, Tong Luo, Yaqian Li, Shilong Liu, et al. Recognize anything: A strong image tagging model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03514 , 2023. Muzhi Zhu, Yuzhuo Tian, Hao Chen, Chunluan Zhou, Qingpei Guo, Yang Liu, Ming Yang, and Chunhua Shen. Segagent: Exploring pixel understanding capabilities in mllms by imitating human annotator trajectories. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 3686–3696, 2025. 22