Title: CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01171v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:25:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Ghadi Nehme 1 Eamon Whalen 2 Faez Ahmed 1

Abstract 

Despite recent progress, recovering parametric CAD construction sequences from geometric in-put, such as meshes or point clouds, is a key chal-lenge for design and manufacturing, as existing CAD reconstruction and generation methods are largely restricted to difficult-to-edit formats like meshes or Breps or editable simple sketch-and-extrude pipelines and low-complexity datasets. We introduce CADFit , a hybrid optimization-based CAD reconstruction framework that re-covers complex, editable CAD construction se-quences from meshes by incrementally fitting and validating parametric operations using geomet-ric feedback. Our approach is distinguished by formulating reconstruction as an IoU-driven op-timization over structured CAD programs and supporting a rich set of operations, including ex-trusions, revolutions, fillets, and chamfers. Ex-periments on multiple CAD benchmarks show that CADFit outperforms state-of-the-art mesh-to-CAD methods in volumetric Intersection-over-Union and Chamfer Distance, while substantially reducing the Invalid Ratio of reconstructed CAD programs, particularly for complex designs. We further present a multimodal pipeline that en-ables end-to-end reconstruction of CAD con-struction sequences from images by combining image-based geometry reconstruction with CAD-Fit. By enabling accurate reconstruction of higher-complexity CAD models, CADFit provides a practical foundation for generating richer datasets and advancing future learning-based approaches to CAD reverse engineering. 

> 1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Insti-tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2Siemens Digital Industries Software, Plano, TX 75024, USA. Correspondence to: Ghadi Nehme <ghadi@mit.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

1. Introduction 

Parametric CAD models represent geometry as structured construction sequences composed of geometric operations with continuous parameters. Such representations are widely used in engineering workflows because they en-able compact shape specification and support downstream editing and constraint-based modeling. Recovering para-metric construction sequences from raw geometric data, however, remains a challenging inverse problem. A sin-gle target shape may admit many distinct but geometrically valid construction sequences, while each sequence must satisfy strict geometric constraints. Moreover, the prob-lem requires jointly inferring discrete operation choices (e.g., feature type and ordering) and continuous parameters (e.g., dimensions and placements), making the search space highly non-convex and combinatorial. Despite recent progress in CAD generation and reconstruc-tion, existing AI-based methods remain limited in both op-erational expressiveness and geometric complexity. Most current CAD generation models focus on a narrow subset of operations, typically sketch-and-extrude pipelines, and are trained on datasets containing relatively simple shapes with few interacting features (Khan et al., 2024; Alam & Ahmed, 2024; Wang et al., 2025). As a consequence, these mod-els struggle to represent realistic CAD designs involving multiple construction operations, complex boolean logic, and finishing operations such as fillets and chamfers. This limitation is not only a modeling issue but also a data bottle-neck: the lack of accurate tools for reconstructing complex CAD construction sequences has constrained the scale and diversity of datasets available for learning. In this paper, we introduce CADFit , a hybrid optimization-based method for reconstructing CAD construction se-quences directly from geometry. Given a watertight input mesh, CADFit recovers an ordered program composed of parametric operations drawn from a rich operator set, in-cluding extrusions, revolutions, fillets, and chamfers, and composed using Boolean union and cut. Rather than predict-ing programs in a single forward pass, CADFit formulates reconstruction as an explicit optimization problem over exe-cutable CAD programs, guided by geometric feedback. The core insight behind CADFit is that valid CAD programs can be recovered by tightly coupling geometric reasoning 1 

> arXiv:2605.01171v1 [cs.CV] 2 May 2026 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization
> Figure 1. Mesh-to-CAD construction sequences generated by CADFit with varying complexity, including extrusions, revolutions, fillets, and chamfers.

with program execution. CADFit first extracts candidate sketch profiles from the input mesh, then generates a small set of geometrically consistent operation candidates by an-alyzing how parametric sweeps affect surface alignment. These candidates are assembled into a construction sequence using an IoU-guided selection procedure that explicitly ex-ecutes and validates each operation. To reduce the combi-natorial search space, CADFit additionally trains a sketch selection model that predicts which extracted sketch profiles are likely to contribute to the final construction sequence. This learned prior is trained using labels automatically ob-tained from optimization-based reconstructions and is used only to filter candidates, without affecting correctness. Importantly, CADFit decouples geometric perception from parametric reconstruction. The method operates on surface geometry and can therefore be composed with upstream models that reconstruct meshes from images or point clouds. This design enables a unified pipeline for mesh-, point-cloud-, and image-based CAD reconstruction without re-training or modifying the core algorithm. We evaluate CADFit on multiple benchmarks, including DeepCAD (Wu et al., 2021), Fusion360 Gallery (Willis et al., 2021), and ABC (Koch et al., 2019), spanning a wide range of geometric complexity. Across all benchmarks, CADFit achieves state-of-the-art performance in volumetric IoU and Chamfer Distance while maintaining zero invalid outputs. Beyond geometric accuracy, CADFit recovers com-pact construction sequences that are often more concise than those found in existing CAD datasets, suggesting improved supervision for future learning-based approaches. 

Contributions. We make the following contributions: • Hybrid optimization for executable mesh-to-CAD programs. We propose CADF IT , an optimization-based framework that reconstructs executable Cad-Query/OpenCascade CAD construction sequences from a watertight input mesh by explicitly optimizing volumetric IoU under CAD-kernel validation, support-ing extrude, revolve primitives, Boolean (union & cut), and finishing operations (fillet & chamfer). • Geometry-driven candidate generation and com-pact program search. We introduce a reconstruc-tion pipeline that (i) extracts sketch profiles from pla-nar face clusters and slicing planes, (ii) generates a small set of high-quality extrude & revolve candidates via one-sided Chamfer parameter sweeps and stable-interval selection, (iii) assembles compact sequences via IoU-guided backward pruning and iterative resid-ual reconstruction with union & cut, and (iv) acceler-ates search using a learned sketch prior trained from optimization-derived supervision. • Complexity-aware benchmarks and multimodal reconstruction. We establish and evaluate on benchmarks spanning a wide range of CAD com-plexity (DeepCAD, Fusion360, and ABC stratified by complexity), and demonstrate consistent gains in IoU/Chamfer and near-zero invalid outputs for both mesh-to-CAD and an end-to-end image-to-CAD pipeline (image to mesh to CADF IT ). 2CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

2. Related Work 

Learning-Based CAD Program Generation. There has been increasing interest in neural methods that generate or reconstruct CAD models as sequences of parametric opera-tions. Early approaches such as DeepCAD (Wu et al., 2021) introduce a domain-specific language (DSL) for sketch-and-extrude programs and learn sequence autoencoders over this representation. Subsequent methods extend this paradigm to richer inputs and outputs, including point clouds and meshes, and generate executable CAD code using struc-tured decoders or code-generation models (Yu et al., 2025; Rukhovich et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). While these methods produce editable outputs, they rely on amortized sequence prediction and often struggle with long, compositional pro-grams, complex boolean interactions, and finishing opera-tions such as fillets and chamfers. Recent work further explores multimodal conditioning and large language models for CAD code generation (Doris et al., 2025; Kolodiazhnyi et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2024a). These approaches broaden the range of inputs and tasks but inherit the brittleness of autoregressive program generation and do not explicitly optimize for geometric fidelity or pro-gram optimality. In contrast, CADFit avoids direct sequence prediction and instead reconstructs construction programs through geometry-driven optimization. 

Geometry-Driven CAD Reverse Engineering and B-rep Reconstruction. Another line of work focuses on recover-ing CAD structure from geometric input using reverse engi-neering techniques. Classical pipelines decompose shapes into primitives and fit analytic surfaces, but struggle to as-semble consistent parametric models for complex designs. Recent learning-assisted methods improve robustness by combining neural segmentation with analytic fitting, par-ticularly for boundary representation (B-rep) reconstruc-tion (Liu et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024b; Lee et al., 2025). These methods produce accurate surface topology and ge-ometry, but do not recover ordered construction sequences or design intent encoded in parametric CAD programs. Inverse CSG methods formulate reconstruction as a com-binatorial or optimization-based search over boolean pro-grams (Du et al., 2018). Although such formulations im-prove validity guarantees, they typically operate over simple primitive sets and do not scale to sketch-based operations, revolutions, or finishing features. CADFit differs by op-timizing directly over parametric CAD operations while maintaining explicit geometric validation. 

Structured CAD Representations and Datasets. Large-scale datasets such as ABC, DeepCAD, and Fusion360 have enabled learning structured representations of CAD models, including sketches, feature trees, and operation graphs (Koch et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021; Willis et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023; Uy et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024). More recent work studies neural representations of sketches, loops, and construction graphs to improve interpretability and controllability (Xu et al., 2023; Karadeniz et al., 2025). However, construction sequences in these datasets are of-ten redundant or suboptimal, reflecting human modeling practices rather than minimal or canonical programs. CADFit complements these efforts by reconstructing shorter, cleaner construction sequences through explicit optimiza-tion, which can serve as higher-quality supervision for future learning-based models. 

Multimodal 3D Reconstruction Pipelines. Advances in image- and point-based 3D reconstruction have enabled pipelines that combine perception models with downstream CAD inference. Methods such as Pixel2Mesh (Wang et al., 2018), Trellis (Xiang et al., 2025), and Hunyuan3D (Zhao et al., 2025) recover high-quality surface geometry from im-ages or sparse observations. Several recent works combine such models with CAD reconstruction (Li et al., 2025), but often require modality-specific adaptations or retraining. CADFit adopts a decoupled design in which perception models recover surface geometry, while parametric recon-struction is performed via geometry-driven optimization, en-abling robust CAD program recovery even from remeshed and smoothed reconstructed surfaces. 

3. Method 

We introduce CADFit , a hybrid optimization-based framework for recovering editable CAD construction programs from geometric input. Given a watertight mesh M ⊂ R3, CADFit reconstructs an ordered CAD program Π = (o1, . . . , o T ) whose execution produces a solid closely approximating M. Each oper-ation ot belongs to a fixed parametric operator set O =

{EXTRUDE , REVOLVE , FILLET , CHAMFER , UNION , CUT },.The complete procedure is summarized in Fig. 3. 

Problem Formulation. Let Solid(Π) denote the solid ob-tained by executing program Π. We seek a valid program maximizing volumetric overlap with the target mesh: 

Π⋆ = arg max  

> Π∈S

IoU  Solid(Π) , M,

where S denotes the space of syntactically and geometrically valid CAD programs. Boolean U NION and C UT operations are applied sequentially to compose intermediate solids. 

CAD Program Representation. Each opera-tion ot ∈ Π is represented as a tuple ot =(τt, θ t, R t), where τt is the operation type, τt ∈{EXTRUDE , REVOLVE , FILLET , CHAMFER , UNION , CUT },θt denotes the continuous operation parameters (e.g., extru-sion height, revolution angle and axis, fillet radius, chamfer 3CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization Sketch 1 Revolution Extrusion Cut Boolean Fillet Chamfer Sketch 2               

> plane_1 = cq.Plane(origin, normal, xDir) sketch_1 = cq.Workplane(plane_1) sketch_1 = sketch_1.moveTo(p0) sketch_1 = sketch_1.lineTo(p1) ... sketch_1 = sketch_1.lineTo(pn) sketch_1 = sketch_1.close() solid_1 = sketch_1.revolve(angleDegrees, axisStart,axisEnd)
> plane_2 = cq.Plane(origin, normal, xDir) sketch_2 = cq.Workplane(plane_2) loop_1 = sketch_2.moveTo(p0) loop_1 = loop_1.threePointArc(p1, p2) ... loop_1 = loop_1.lineTo(pn) loop_1 = loop_1.close() sketch_2=sketch_2.add(loop_1) solid_2 = sketch_2.extrude(distance)
> solid_3 = solid_1.cut(solid_2) solid_3 = solid_3.val().wrapped edges = find_filletable_edges(solid_3) solid_3 = cq.Solid(solid_3) edge_to_fillet = cq.Edge(edges[i]) solid_4 = solid_3.fillet(radius, [edge_to_fillet]) solid_4 = solid_4.val().wrapped edges = find_filletable_edges(solid_4) solid_4 = cq.Solid(solid_4) edge_to_chamfer =cq.Edge(edges[j]) solid_5 = solid_4.chamfer([edge_to_chamfer], length, length2)

Figure 2. Executable CadQuery program reconstructed by CADFit, illustrating sketch-based primitives, extrusion and revolution operations, Boolean cut and union, and subsequent fillet and chamfer features. 

length), and Rt specifies the geometric references required by the operation. Depending on τt, Rt may refer to a sketch profile, a set of edges, or one or more existing solids. We implement CADFit using CadQuery (contributors, 2025), an OpenCascade-based parametric CAD library. CAD programs Π are represented directly using the Cad-Query operation grammar, including extrude , revolve ,

fillet , chamfer , union , and cut , with sketches de-fined on explicit planes using line, arc, and circle primitives (Fig. 2). Kernel feedback is used to reject invalid opera-tions during optimization; operations that fail to execute are discarded. 

Single-Pass Reconstruction. Given a target mesh M,CADFit performs a single-pass reconstruction that extracts sketch profiles, generates and evaluates parametric opera-tion candidates, assembles a compact base program by IoU-guided pruning, and augments it with refinement features. This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Sketch Extraction and Profile Formation. CADFit con-structs a finite set of sketch profiles G = {gi} from M using explicit geometric operators. Candidate sketch planes are defined by (i) detected planar face clusters and (ii) a fixed set of axis-aligned slicing planes. For each plane (o, n),we compute local mesh sections and project resulting inter-section curves onto the plane, yielding ordered 2D loops. Degenerate loops are discarded, and remaining loops are grouped by polygon containment to form sketch profiles with outer boundaries and interior holes. All geometric extraction steps are detailed in Appendix I. 

Learning-Based Sketch Prior. To reduce the size of the sketch profile set G, CADFit employs a learned sketch prior 

f (Q(M), g ) ∈ [0 , 1] , which estimates the probability that a sketch profile g contributes to an optimal CAD program. Training data is generated using the pure optimization-based reconstruction pipeline. Sketch profiles selected by the re-covered CAD program are labeled positive, while remaining extracted profiles are labeled negative. We train a surface 

Algorithm 1 CADFit: Single-Pass Reconstruction 

Input: mesh M

Output: CAD program Π, reconstructed solid S

Extract sketch profiles G from M { Appendix I }

(Π base , S base ) ← SEQUENCE SEARCH (G, M)(Π fc , S ) ← RECOVER FILLET CHAMFER (Sbase , M)Π ← Πbase ∪ Πfc 

return (Π , S )

point cloud encoder for M and a sketch encoder for the 3D loop geometry of each profile; their embeddings are fused and passed to a binary classifier to produce a probability score p(g | M ).At inference time, sketch profiles are sampled according to p(g | M ), introducing controlled stochasticity that bi-ases candidate generation toward relevant sketches while preserving exploration. The selected profiles are then fit with sketch primitives. Additional details are provided in Appendix L. 

Geometry-Driven Candidate Generation. For each sketch profile g ∈ G , CADFit generates a small discrete set of E X-

TRUDE and R EVOLVE candidates by solving a continuous parameter selection problem. Let Q(M) denote a surface point cloud sampled from M. For a candidate operation 

o(g, θ ), we define a one-sided Chamfer objective 

D(θ) = 1

|P (g, θ )|

X

x∈P (g,θ )

min 

y∈Q(M) ∥x − y∥22,

where P (g, θ ) are surface points induced by applying the operation with parameters θ to profile g. Rather than mini-mizing D directly, we sweep θ over a bounded domain and identify stable parameter intervals preceding sharp increases in D. These intervals correspond to geometrically consis-tent operations that do not overshoot the target shape. All parameter selection details are provided in Appendix K. 

IoU-Guided Program Assembly. Let C = {cj } denote 4CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization Fillet 1 Fillet 2 

> Fillet 3

I. Sketch Extraction and Profile Formation 

> … …
> Concatenate

Input Mesh 

II. Sketch Selection via Learning-Based Sketch Prior 

> Surface Point Cloud Encoder
> Loop Point Cloud Encoder
> Binary Classifier

III. Parallelized Geometry-Driven Candidate Generation 

V. IoU-Guided Program Assembly and Refinements IV. Sketch Primitive Fitting           

> Sketch Profiles obtained from orthogonal and planar slices of the mesh
> (o 1, n 1)(o 2, n 2)(o 3, n 3)
> L1
> L2
> L3
> L4
> L5 L6
> L7
> L8
> L9
> L10
> L11
> L12
> L13 L14
> L15
> L16
> A1
> A2 A3 A4
> C1
> Best candidates combining profiles with optimal operation and parameters
> Compute IoU with Input Mesh 0.72 0.05 0.003 0.15
> Point Cloud
> Profile Points Loop

Revolution 

> Take the union of all optimal candidates
> 0.01 0.15 0.19 CD
> Select the edge and fillet radius or chamfer length that maximize IoU
> CD
> h
> Apply marginal contribution pruning on the operations
> +

Extrusion 

Reconstruct Once 

Input Mesh 

CADFit: Iterative Fitting of Meshes 

Reconstruct Once 

Compute the volume of these differences 

Reconstructed CAD Construction Sequence 

Iterations or Volumes 

Reconstruct Once 

Reconstruct Once 

> 0.99
> 0.12

Figure 3. Overview of the CADFit Pipeline for Iterative Mesh-to-CAD Reconstruction 

Algorithm 2 IoU-Guided Construction Sequence Search 

Input: sketch profiles G, mesh M

Output: CAD program Π, solid S

Generate candidates C { Appendix K }

Π ← C 

S ← Solid(Π) 

repeat 

o⋆ ← arg max o∈Π

h

IoU( S−

o , M) − IoU( S, M)

i

where S−

o := Solid(Π \ { o})

if IoU( S−

o⋆ , M) ≥ IoU( S, M) then 

Π ← Π \ { o⋆}

S ← S−

o⋆

else break end if until no removable operation improves IoU 

return (Π , S )

the set of all generated operation candidates. CADFit first forms the union of all candidates, Sall = S

c∈C c, and then constructs a compact base program by backward marginal pruning. Starting from Π = C and S = Sall , candidates are iteratively removed according to their marginal removal effect ∆−(c | S) = IoU(Solid(Π \{ o}), M)−IoU( S, M),

Algorithm 3 Iterative Residual CAD Program Reconstruc-tion 

Input: mesh M, tolerance ϵ, max iterations T

Output: CAD program Π⋆

(Π , S ) ← RECONSTRUCT ONCE (M)

for t = 1 to T do 

R+ ← M \ S, R− ← S \ M 

if Vol( R+) ≤ ϵ and Vol( R−) ≤ ϵ then break end if 

Reconstruct R+ and R− and combine via U NION /C UT 

end for return Π⋆

removing at each step the candidate with the largest ∆−.Pruning stops when removing any remaining candidate would decrease IoU. The resulting subset maximizes IoU under union composition while minimizing the number of operations. 

Iterative Residual Reconstruction. To model complex shapes, CADFit applies a bounded number of residual re-construction iterations. At iteration k, residual meshes 

R+

k = M \ Sk and R−

k = Sk \ M are reconstructed using the same single-pass pipeline and combined with the current program using Boolean U NION or C UT . Iterations terminate 5CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

when residual volumes fall below a threshold ϵ or when a fixed iteration budget is reached. The full procedure is given in Algorithm 3. See Appendix H for a theoretical analysis of IoU-guided residual assembly and backward pruning. 

Multimodal CAD Reconstruction. CADFit is formulated as a mesh-to-CAD reconstruction method but is agnostic to the source of the mesh. By treating geometry as an in-termediate representation, CADFit can be composed with upstream perception models that reconstruct surface geom-etry from images or point clouds. For image-based inputs, we obtain a surface mesh using a pretrained image-to-3D model and apply standard post-processing to satisfy CAD-Fit’s geometric assumptions. The processed mesh is then passed directly to CADFit without modification of the re-construction pipeline. Implementation details are provided in Appendices D and E. Importantly, CADFit is not retrained or adapted for dif-ferent input modalities. The same optimization procedure is applied unchanged to meshes originating from images, point clouds, or CAD exports, enabling a clean separation between perception and parametric reconstruction. We eval-uate the resulting end-to-end pipeline in Section 4. 

4. Experiments 

We evaluate CADFit on two settings: mesh-to-CAD and 

image-to-CAD . Across both settings, the goal is to recover an editable CAD construction program whose execution yields a solid that matches the target. 

4.1. Tasks and Baselines Mesh-to-CAD. Given a watertight input mesh M, methods must output a CAD construction sequence (or an equiva-lent executable program) that reconstructs M. We com-pare against three baselines: GenCAD-3D (Yu et al., 2025), CAD-Recode (Rukhovich et al., 2025), and Cadrille (Kolo-diazhnyi et al., 2025). When a baseline does not support mesh input, we follow its standard preprocessing and pro-vide point-cloud input. 

Image-to-CAD. Given a single RGB image, we first re-construct an intermediate surface mesh using a pretrained image-to-3D model. We adopt Hunyuan3D (Zhao et al., 2025) after comparing it against another state-of-the-art image-to-mesh method, Trellis (Xiang et al., 2025), with an ablation study reported in Appendix 6. The reconstructed mesh is then post-processed to satisfy CADFit’s geometric assumptions by enforcing watertightness, applying Taubin smoothing (Taubin, 1995) to suppress high-frequency arti-facts, and performing mesh decimation. All mesh-to-CAD baselines (GenCAD-3D, CAD-Recode, Cadrille) are run on these processed meshes. We additionally compare against a direct image-to-CAD program generation baseline CAD-Coder (Doris et al., 2025). 

4.2. Benchmarks 

We construct benchmarks spanning a wide range of geo-metric complexity. Throughout, we use STEP face count 

as a proxy for CAD complexity (a common and effective complexity measure (Contero et al., 2023)). 

DeepCAD (complex subset). We evaluate on the official DeepCAD test split and select the most complex CAD mod-els according to STEP face count to avoid over-representing trivial primitives (e.g., cylinders and boxes). The resulting DeepCAD test set contains 300 shapes. 

Fusion360 Gallery (uniform face-count). We sample 300 CAD models from Fusion360 Gallery such that the STEP face count is approximately uniform over a predefined range. This benchmark stresses reconstruction across diverse ge-ometries while controlling for complexity distribution. 

ABC (stratified by complexity). ABC con-tains shapes spanning from very simple to ex-tremely complex CAD. We partition ABC into three complexity windows using STEP face count: Easy: [1 , 15] , Medium: [16 , 150] , Hard: [151 , 1500] ,

and sample 300 shapes uniformly over face count within each window. Shapes with more than 1500 faces are excluded to avoid extreme outliers. 

ABC Image-to-CAD benchmark. For image-to-CAD, we sample 150 shapes from each ABC window (Easy/Medium/Hard), render an isometric view per shape using Blender, and use these images as inputs (Fig. 9). 

4.3. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate using Chamfer Distance (CD), volumetric Intersection-over-Union (IoU), and Invalid Ratio (IR). Pre-dictions are rigidly aligned with a global scale to ground truth by minimizing symmetric CD prior to computing CD and IoU. CD is the symmetric Chamfer Distance between surface point clouds, with ground-truth meshes normalized to [−1, 1] 3. IoU, IoU( A, B ) = Vol( A ∩ B)/Vol( A ∪ B), is estimated via Monte Carlo sampling. IR measures the frac-tion of invalid outputs (e.g., failed CAD program execution). Details are in Appendix C. 

4.4. Results Mesh-to-CAD. Table 1 reports quantitative mesh-to-CAD results on DeepCAD, Fusion360, and ABC, stratified by CAD complexity measured using STEP face count. Across all benchmarks, CADFit consistently outperforms prior methods in IoU, Chamfer Distance, and Invalid Ratio. Learning-based baselines such as GenCAD-3D and Cadrille 6CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization GenCAD-3D       

> DeepCAD Fusion360 ABC Easy
> Mesh Input
> CADFit (Ours)
> Cadrille
> ABC Medium ABC Hard
> CAD-Recode
> Invalid Invalid
> Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid

Figure 4. Qualitative mesh-to-CAD reconstruction results on DeepCAD, Fusion360, and ABC (easy, medium and hard subsets). 

Table 1. CAD construction sequence reconstruction results on DeepCAD and Fusion360, and on ABC stratified by CAD complexity. Improvement is computed relative to the strongest baseline in each column (max IoU / min CD / min IR).                                                                                                             

> DeepCAD Fusion360 ABC Method IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓Easy Medium Hard IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓
> GenCAD-3D 0.255 0.132 0.020 0.208 0.143 0.313 0.258 0.141 0.263 0.204 0.135 0.377 0.135 0.128 0.390 Cadrille 0.857 0.021 0.063 0.092 0.172 0.460 0.126 0.186 0.360 0.111 0.161 0.400 0.086 0.154 0.417 CAD-Recode 0.818 0.027 0.000 0.761 0.027 0.003 0.773 0.030 0.003 0.571 0.044 0.020 0.333 0.054 0.010
> CADFit (Ours) 0.960 0.016 0.000 0.917 0.017 0.000 0.873 0.027 0.000 0.790 0.028 0.000 0.547 0.034 0.000 Improvement (%) ↑12.0 ↓23.8 0.0 ↑20.5 ↓37.0 ↓100.0 ↑12.9 ↓10.0 ↓100.0 ↑38.3 ↓36.4 ↓100.0 ↑64.3 ↓37.0 ↓100.0 Image Input
> CADFit (Ours)
> CAD-Recode
> CAD-Coder

Figure 5. Qualitative image-to-CAD reconstruction results com-paring CADFit with prior methods. 

exhibit limited generalization beyond their training distribu-tions. While these methods achieve reasonable performance on datasets similar to their training data, their reconstruc-tion quality degrades sharply on more diverse benchmarks such as Fusion360 and on higher-complexity ABC subsets. This behavior is particularly evident in the Hard ABC split, where GenCAD-3D and Cadrille frequently oversimplify geometry or fail to recover a valid sequence. In contrast, CADFit maintains strong performance across datasets and complexity levels. On the ABC Hard sub-set, CADFit more than doubles the median IoU of the strongest prior method (CAD-Recode) (Figure 4), demon-strating its ability to recover long and interacting construc-tion sequences. These gains highlight the importance of geometry-driven optimization and explicit program valida-tion when reconstructing complex CAD models. Qualita-tive comparisons in Fig. 4 further show that CADFit more faithfully recovers thin structures, rotational primitives, and multi-step compositions that are often missed by purely learning-based approaches. 

Image-to-CAD. Table 2 reports end-to-end image-to-CAD results on the ABC subsets. Despite noise and artifacts introduced during image-based reconstruction, the Hun-7CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization                                                                              

> Table 2. Image-to-CAD construction sequence reconstruction results on the ABC dataset subsets easy, medium and hard.
> ABC Method Easy Medium Hard IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓IoU ↑CD ↓IR ↓
> Cadrille 0.343 0.125 0.413 0.214 0.101 0.320 0.160 0.098 0.407 GenCAD-3D 0.310 0.104 0.047 0.246 0.112 0.107 0.169 0.096 0.207 CAD-Coder 0.405 0.086 0.013 0.2912 0.103 0.027 0.1710 0.104 0.053 CAD-Recode 0.437 0.063 0.000 0.391 0.071 0.000 0.237 0.074 0.040
> CADFit (Ours) 0.669 0.036 0.000 0.545 0.037 0.000 0.380 0.041 0.000 Improvement (%) ↑53.1 ↓42.9 0.0 ↑39.4 ↓47.9 0.0 ↑60.3 ↓44.6 ↓100.0
> Table 3. Breakdown of CADFit wins across IoU and construction sequence length against Cadrille and CAD-Recode on the complex DeepCAD subset (N = 300).
> Outcome Percentage
> Wins both IoU and length 69.8% Wins IoU only 25.3% Wins length only 3.9% Wins neither 1.1%

yuan3D + preprocessing + CADFit pipeline achieves the best performance across all complexity levels. This result underscores the advantage of decomposing image-to-CAD reconstruction into a multi-stage process, where each com-ponent addresses a well-defined subproblem: perception models recover approximate surface geometry, while CAD-Fit performs structured parametric reconstruction. Addi-tional results and visualizations can be found in Appendix A. Beyond synthetic renderings, this pipeline generalizes to real-world images of complex mechanical parts. By recon-structing editable CAD programs from photographs, CAD-Fit enables downstream editing, variant generation, and reuse, capabilities that are not accessible from mesh-only outputs. More details in Appendix B. 

Construction Sequence Quality. Beyond geometric accu-racy, CADFit recovers compact construction sequences. As shown in Table 3, in 95.1% of cases CADFit achieves higher IoU than competing methods, and in 69.8% of cases it si-multaneously attains the highest IoU and the shortest valid sequence. Moreover, in 85% of cases CADFit generates construction sequences that are shorter than the ground-truth DeepCAD programs while achieving IoU > 0.9 (Figure 7). This behavior arises from CADFit’s optimization-driven formulation, which retains only operations that improve geometric fidelity rather than replicating potentially redun-dant or suboptimal construction histories. As a result, the recovered programs are easier to interpret and edit. Such programs may serve as improved training data for learning-based CAD models or as structured exploration policies for reinforcement learning approaches to CAD design. 

5. Conclusion 

We introduced CADFit , an optimization-based method for reconstructing structured, executable CAD construction sequences from geometric input. By formulating recon-struction as iterative fitting with explicit program valida-tion, CADFit reliably recovers complex parametric oper-ations while guaranteeing validity. Across mesh-to-CAD and image-to-CAD benchmarks, CADFit outperforms prior methods in geometric accuracy, robustness, and construc-tion sequence quality, with especially large gains on high-complexity designs. CADFit adopts a decoupled design in which perception models recover surface geometry and para-metric reconstruction is performed via geometry-driven op-timization. This allows the same pipeline to operate across meshes and images and enables improvements in upstream reconstruction to transfer directly to CAD inference. Be-yond precise geometric reconstruction, CADFit produces compact construction sequences that are often shorter than those in existing CAD datasets and prior methods. Future work includes extending the operator set to lofts, sweeps, and pattern features, using CADFit to build higher-quality and complexity CAD datasets, and leveraging it as a struc-tured policy for training learning-based or reinforcement learning CAD agents with geometry feedback. 

Limitations: CADFit prioritizes accuracy and robustness over inference speed, resulting in longer runtimes than fully amortized learning-based methods (Appendix A for tim-ings). The method supports a restricted but expressive operation set—extrusions, revolutions, fillets, and cham-fers—which covers many engineering designs but remains limited for shapes dominated by high-curvature geometry or operations such as lofts and sweeps. CADFit is not a gen-erative model and does not support unconditional sampling or diverse shape generation. Its performance also depends on the quality of the intermediate mesh reconstruction; fail-ures in upstream image-to-3D models can propagate to the recovered CAD program. Representative failure cases are provided in Appendix G. 8CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Impact Statement 

This work aims to improve efficiency and structure in CAD reconstruction by recovering compact and precise construc-tion programs from geometric observations. By enabling reusable and editable CAD representations, the proposed method may support faster engineering iteration and reduce reliance on manual modeling workflows. We do not foresee any immediate ethical or societal risks beyond those com-monly associated with automation in engineering design tools. 

References 

Alam, M. F. and Ahmed, F. Gencad: Image-conditioned computer-aided design generation with transformer-based contrastive representation and diffusion priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16294 , 2024. Contero, M., P ´erez-L ´opez, D., Company, P., and Camba, J. D. A quantitative analysis of parametric cad model com-plexity and its relationship to perceived modeling com-plexity. Advanced Engineering Informatics , 56:101970, 2023. contributors, C. Cadquery, October 2025. URL https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14590990 .Doris, A. C., Alam, M. F., Heyrani Nobari, A., and Ahmed, F. Cad-coder: An open-source vision-language model for computer-aided design code generation. In Interna-tional Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference ,volume 89220, pp. V03AT03A031. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2025. Du, T., Inala, J. P., Pu, Y., Spielberg, A., Schulz, A., Rus, D., Solar-Lezama, A., and Matusik, W. Inversecsg: Auto-matic conversion of 3d models to csg trees. ACM Trans-actions on Graphics (TOG) , 37(6):1–16, 2018. Karadeniz, A. S., Mallis, D., Rukhovich, D., Cherenkova, K., Kacem, A., and Aouada, D. MiCADangelo: Fine-grained reconstruction of constrained CAD models from 3d scans. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=GoFYIRUVAz .Khan, M. S., Dupont, E., Ali, S. A., Cherenkova, K., Kacem, A., and Aouada, D. Cad-signet: Cad language inference from point clouds using layer-wise sketch instance guided attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4713– 4722, 2024. Kim, S., Chi, H.-g., Hu, X., Huang, Q., and Ramani, K. A large-scale annotated mechanical components benchmark for classification and retrieval tasks with deep neural net-works. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 175–191. Springer, 2020. Koch, S., Matveev, A., Jiang, Z., Williams, F., Artemov, A., Burnaev, E., Alexa, M., Zorin, D., and Panozzo, D. Abc: A big cad model dataset for geometric deep learning. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 9601–9611, 2019. Kolodiazhnyi, M., Tarasov, D., Zhemchuzhnikov, D., Nikulin, A., Zisman, I., Vorontsova, A., Konushin, A., Kurenkov, V., and Rukhovich, D. cadrille: Multi-modal cad reconstruction with online reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22914 , 2025. Lee, M., Zhang, D., Jambon, C., and Kim, Y. M. Brepdiff: Single-stage b-rep diffusion model. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers ,pp. 1–11, 2025. Li, Y., Lin, C., Liu, Y., Long, X., Zhang, C., Wang, N., Li, X., Wang, W., and Guo, X. Caddreamer: Cad object generation from single-view images. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pp. 21448–21457, 2025. Liu, Y., Obukhov, A., Wegner, J. D., and Schindler, K. Point2cad: Reverse engineering cad models from 3d point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3763– 3772, 2024. Rukhovich, D., Dupont, E., Mallis, D., Cherenkova, K., Kacem, A., and Aouada, D. Cad-recode: Reverse engi-neering cad code from point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 9801–9811, 2025. Taubin, G. Curve and surface smoothing without shrink-age. In Proceedings of IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 852–857. IEEE, 1995. Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Yu, J., Sori-cut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A. M., Hauth, A., Millican, K., et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Uy, M. A., Chang, Y.-Y., Sung, M., Goel, P., Lambourne, J. G., Birdal, T., and Guibas, L. J. Point2cyl: Reverse engineering 3d objects from point clouds to extrusion cylinders. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 11850– 11860, 2022. 9CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Wang, N., Zhang, Y., Li, Z., Fu, Y., Liu, W., and Jiang, Y.-G. Pixel2mesh: Generating 3d mesh models from single rgb images. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018. Wang, S., Chen, C., Le, X., Xu, Q., Xu, L., Zhang, Y., and Yang, J. Cad-gpt: Synthesising cad construction sequence with spatial reasoning-enhanced multimodal llms. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 7880–7888, 2025. Willis, K. D., Pu, Y., Luo, J., Chu, H., Du, T., Lambourne, J. G., Solar-Lezama, A., and Matusik, W. Fusion 360 gallery: A dataset and environment for programmatic cad construction from human design sequences. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 40(4):1–24, 2021. Wu, R., Xiao, C., and Zheng, C. Deepcad: A deep gen-erative network for computer-aided design models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. Xiang, J., Lv, Z., Xu, S., Deng, Y., Wang, R., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Tong, X., and Yang, J. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pp. 21469–21480, 2025. Xu, J., Wang, C., Zhao, Z., Liu, W., Ma, Y., and Gao, S. Cad-mllm: Unifying multimodality-conditioned cad generation with mllm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04954 ,2024a. Xu, X., Jayaraman, P. K., Lambourne, J. G., Willis, K. D., and Furukawa, Y. Hierarchical neural coding for controllable cad model generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00149 , 2023. Xu, X., Lambourne, J., Jayaraman, P., Wang, Z., Willis, K., and Furukawa, Y. Brepgen: A b-rep generative diffusion model with structured latent geometry. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–14, 2024b. Yu, N., Alam, M. F., Hart, A. J., and Ahmed, F. Gencad-3d: Cad program generation using multimodal latent space alignment and synthetic dataset balancing. In Interna-tional Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference ,volume 89220, pp. V03AT03A015. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2025. Zhao, Z., Lai, Z., Lin, Q., Zhao, Y., Liu, H., Yang, S., Feng, Y., Yang, M., Zhang, S., Yang, X., et al. Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffusion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12202 ,2025. 10 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Table of Contents for Appendices 

A. Additional Results and Visualizations 12 

B. Realistic Photos to CAD Construction Sequence 14 

C. Metric Computation 15 

C.1. Shape Alignment 15 

C.2. Chamfer Distance 15 

C.3. Volumetric IoU Estimation 15 

D. Image-to-Mesh Preprocessing 16 

E. Ablation Study: Trellis vs Hunyuan3D 16 

F. Benchmark Construction 17 

G. Failure Cases 18 

H. Theoretical Properties of IoU-Guided Assembly 19 

I. Sketch Extraction and Profile Formation 21 

J. Sketch Primitive Fitting 22 

K. Geometry-Driven Operation Parameter Search 23 

L. Learning-Based Sketch Prior 23 

M. Fillet and Chamfer Recovery 24 11 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

A. Additional Results and Visualizations Input Image    

> Hunyuan3D Mesh CADFit Input Image CADFit
> Hunyuan3D Mesh

Figure 6. Qualitative Image-to-CAD results on the ABC Hard subset, showing the input image, intermediate Hunyuan3D mesh, and final CADFit reconstruction. 

12 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization DeepCAD Ground Truth Sequences   

> CADFit Generated Sequence
> Length = 1 Length = 2
> Length = 1 Length = 6

Figure 7. Examples comparing CADF IT outputs with DeepCAD ground-truth construction sequences. While DeepCAD programs may require multiple operations to form the target shape, CADF IT frequently reconstructs the same geometry using fewer operations, yielding more concise CAD programs. 

Table 4. Median mesh-to-CAD reconstruction results on DeepCAD, Fusion360, and ABC stratified by CAD complexity. 

DeepCAD Fusion360 ABC Method IoU ↑ CD ↓ IoU ↑ CD ↓ Easy Medium Hard IoU ↑ CD ↓ IoU ↑ CD ↓ IoU ↑ CD ↓

GenCAD-3D (Yu et al., 2025) 0.225 0.129 0.163 0.143 0.232 0.136 0.177 0.130 0.104 0.118 Cadrille (Kolodiazhnyi et al., 2025) 0.904 0.0177 0.040 0.163 0.066 0.166 0.048 0.158 0.036 0.140 CAD-Recode (Rukhovich et al., 2025) 0.900 0.0175 0.874 0.0167 0.885 0.0186 0.627 0.0285 0.267 0.0433 

CADFit (Ours) 0.987 0.015 0.979 0.013 0.970 0.018 0.864 0.020 0.572 0.026 

Table 5. Average runtime (seconds per shape) of CADFit across benchmarks. 

Benchmark Mean Runtime (s) Mesh-to-CAD 

DeepCAD (complex subset) 242.3 Fusion360 235.0 ABC Easy 303.0 ABC Medium 396.1 ABC Hard 903.7 

Image-to-CAD (ABC) 

ABC Easy (Hunyuan3D) 299.2 ABC Medium (Hunyuan3D) 343.5 ABC Hard (Hunyuan3D) 357.9 13 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

B. Realistic Photos to CAD Construction Sequence 

We show another use case of CADF IT in a photo-to-CAD experiment. Using a dataset of mechanical components (Kim et al., 2020), we generate realistic images with Gemini (Team et al., 2023) and process them through the image-to-CAD pipeline, reconstructing meshes with Hunyuan3D and recovering executable CAD construction sequences with CADF IT .The results provide qualitative evidence of the pipeline’s ability to handle complex mechanical parts. (Figure 8) Hunyuan3D Mesh 

CADFit 

Input Image  

> Figure 8. Photo-to-CAD reconstruction using Hunyuan3D and CADF IT .

14 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

C. Metric Computation 

C.1. Shape Alignment 

Predicted CAD models may differ from ground-truth shapes by rigid transformations or global scale. To ensure that evaluation reflects geometric fidelity rather than coordinate conventions, we align predicted shapes to the ground truth prior to metric computation. Given point clouds Pgt and Ppred sampled from the ground-truth and predicted surfaces, respectively, we estimate a similarity transform (t, R, s ) consisting of translation, rotation, and isotropic scale by minimizing symmetric Chamfer Distance: 

min  

> t,R,s

CD  s RPpred + t, P gt 

.

Optimization is performed using derivative-free Powell search. The recovered transform is applied to the predicted mesh prior to computing CD and IoU. 

C.2. Chamfer Distance 

Chamfer Distance is computed between surface point clouds sampled uniformly from the predicted and ground-truth meshes. Specifically, given point sets P and ˆP , we compute the symmetric Chamfer Distance 

CD( P, ˆP ) = 12

 1

|P |

X

> x∈P

min  

> y∈ˆP

∥x − y∥2 + 1

| ˆP |

X 

> y∈ˆP

min  

> x∈P

∥x − y∥2

 .

All ground-truth meshes are normalized to the box [−1, 1] 3, so reported CD values are directly comparable across shapes and datasets. 

C.3. Volumetric IoU Estimation 

Volumetric IoU is estimated via Monte Carlo integration. Let B denote the axis-aligned bounding box enclosing both shapes. We uniformly sample N = 100 ,000 points {xi}Ni=1 ∼ U (B) and estimate occupancy using ray casting: 

1A(x) = 

(

1 if x lies inside A, 

0 otherwise. IoU is approximated as 

IoU( A, B ) ≈

P 

> i

1A(xi) 1B (xi)

P 

> i

1A(xi) + 1B (xi) − 1A(xi) 1B (xi) .

Ray casting is implemented on GPU to ensure accurate and scalable evaluation. 15 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

D. Image-to-Mesh Preprocessing 

For image-to-CAD experiments, meshes reconstructed from RGB images may contain noise, holes, or non-manifold artifacts that violate CADFit’s geometric assumptions. We therefore apply a fixed preprocessing pipeline prior to CAD reconstruction. Specifically, meshes produced by Hunyuan3D are post-processed as follows: (i) watertightness is enforced using surface repair; (ii) Taubin smoothing (Taubin, 1995) is applied to suppress high-frequency reconstruction noise while preserving overall shape; (iii) mesh decimation is performed to obtain a well-conditioned triangulation with bounded face count. All preprocessing hyperparameters are fixed across datasets and complexity levels. A quantitative analysis of the impact of preprocessing on downstream CAD reconstruction is provided in this appendix. 

E. Ablation Study: Comparing Trellis and Hunyuan3D on image-to-mesh  

> Table 6. Image-to-mesh reconstruction quality on the ABC dataset for Hunyuan3D and Trellis.

ABC Easy Method IoU mean ↑ IoU median ↑ CD mean ↓ CD median ↓

Hunyuan3D 0.692 0.766 0.031 0.030 Trellis 0.202 0.103 0.043 0.030 

ABC Medium Method IoU mean ↑ IoU median ↑ CD mean ↓ CD median ↓

Hunyuan3D 0.602 0.680 0.031 0.026 Trellis 0.189 0.152 0.050 0.040 

ABC Hard Method IoU mean ↑ IoU median ↑ CD mean ↓ CD median ↓

Hunyuan3D 0.426 0.443 0.032 0.029 Trellis 0.187 0.147 0.055 0.045 16 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

F. Benchmark Construction 

We construct evaluation benchmarks spanning a wide range of CAD complexity. Complexity is measured using STEP face count, which correlates strongly with construction sequence depth and operation diversity. For ABC, shapes are stratified into Easy, Medium, and Hard subsets based on face count thresholds, and samples are drawn uniformly over linear face count within each bin. For DeepCAD and Fusion360, we sample from official test splits and publicly available galleries, respectively, following the protocol described in Section 4. ABC Easy 1-15 Faces  

> ABC Medium 16-150 Faces
> ABC Hard 151-1500 Faces
> Figure 9. Qualitative visualizations of ABC CAD models stratified by complexity, rendered using Blender

17 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

G. Failure Cases Input Meshes   

> CADFit
> Figure 10. Failure cases of CADF IT caused by unsupported operations and curved geometries.

Figure 10 illustrates the main characteristic failure modes of CADF IT . Some failures arise from shapes whose construction relies on operations not currently supported by our kernel, such as lofts or sweeps. Despite this limitation, CADF IT often recovers close geometric approximations using combinations of supported primitives. More challenging cases occur when the ground-truth geometry is dominated by smoothly curved surfaces, for which no stable sketch can be extracted from planar faces or slicing sections. In such scenarios, the method struggles to recover precise constructions. A promising direction to address these cases is to project the shape onto candidate planes and use the resulting contours as sketches, which could significantly extend coverage to curved geometries. 18 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

H. Theoretical Properties of IoU-Guided Program Assembly with U NION /C UT 

This section provides a formal explanation for why CADFit’s IoU-guided residual assembly (i) monotonically improves geometric fidelity (in symmetric-difference error / IoU) up to modeling and candidate-resolution limits, and (ii) produces compact, irredundant programs via backward IoU pruning, under standard feature-based CAD assumptions. 

H.1. Setup 

Let M ⊂ R3 be the target solid and let S denote the current reconstructed solid. Define uncovered and overshoot residuals 

R+(S) = M \ S, R−(S) = S \ M .

Define the normalized symmetric-difference error 

E(S) = Vol( M△ S)Vol( M) = Vol( R+(S)) + Vol( R−(S)) Vol( M) . (1) Let 

a(S) = Vol( R+(S)) Vol( M) , b(S) = Vol( R−(S)) Vol( M) ,

so that E(S) = a(S) + b(S). IoU admits the identity 

IoU( S, M) = Vol( S ∩ M )Vol( S ∪ M ) = 1 − a(S)1 + b(S) . (2) Moreover, for all a, b ≥ 0 with a ≤ 1,

1 − IoU( S, M) = 1 − 1 − a

1 + b = a + b

1 + b ≤ a + b = E(S). (3) Thus, decreasing E(S) (symmetric-difference error) implies increasing IoU up to a monotone rescaling. 

H.2. Assumptions Assumption A1 (Feature-based realizability up to a floor). There exists a feature-based CAD program whose supported operations (sketch-based E XTRUDE /R EVOLVE combined with Boolean U NION /C UT and optional F ILLET /C HAMFER ) can approximate M up to a modeling error floor εmodel ≥ 0:

inf 

> S∈S CADFit

Vol( M△ S)Vol( M) ≤ εmodel , (4) where SCADFit denotes solids expressible by the operation set considered. 

Assumption A2 (Residual-aligned sketch availability). When run on the current residual geometry, the sketch extraction procedure proposes at least one plane/section whose induced candidate operations have nontrivial overlap with any residual region of sufficient volume. In particular, candidate generation is not required to be optimal, only to propose sketches that can “touch” the residual to enable improvement. 

Assumption A3 (Existence of a residual-improving candidate). At iteration t, for the current solid St, the candidate generator produces at least one update (ct, ◦t) with ◦t ∈ {∪ , \} such that 

E(St ◦t ct) ≤ ρ E (St) + εcand , 0 < ρ < 1, ε cand ≥ 0. (5) Here εcand captures candidate-resolution limits (e.g., finite parameter sweeps) and ρ captures a constant-factor progress condition. 

Assumption A4 (IoU-monotone acceptance). The update executed by CADFit at each iteration is chosen to have non-decreasing IoU, i.e., 

IoU( St+1 , M) ≥ IoU( St, M),

equivalently (by (2)), it does not increase E(·) beyond monotone rescaling. 19 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

H.3. Geometric Refinement with Overshoot Correction via C UT 

Theorem H.1 (Geometric refinement under IoU-guided residual assembly) . Under Assumptions A1–A4, the residual procedure produces solids {St}Tt=0 satisfying 

E(ST ) ≤ ρT E(S0) + εcand 

1 − ρ , (6) 

and consequently 

IoU( ST , M) ≥ 1 − ρT E(S0) − εcand 

1 − ρ . (7) 

Proof. By Assumption A3, there exists at iteration t a candidate update (ct, ◦t) such that 

E(St ◦t ct) ≤ ρE (St) + εcand .

By Assumption A4, CADFit selects an update with non-decreasing IoU, i.e., it does not worsen E(·) in the sense of the monotone relationship between IoU and E given by (2). Therefore, the executed update also satisfies 

E(St+1 ) ≤ ρE (St) + εcand .

Unrolling the recurrence gives 

E(ST ) ≤ ρT E(S0) + εcand  

> T−1

X

> k=0

ρk = ρT E(S0) + εcand 

1 − ρT

1 − ρ ≤ ρT E(S0) + εcand 

1 − ρ ,

which proves (6). Finally, applying (3) yields (7). 

Why C UT corrects overshoot. Suppose a U NION update adds extraneous volume X ⊂ (c \ M ). Then X ⊂ R−(S) by definition, i.e., it becomes overshoot residual. A subsequent C UT update S ← S \ c′ with X ⊆ c′ removes it and decreases 

b(S), illustrating that overshoot introduced by unions is correctable through cuts, consistent with the residual formulation. 

H.4. Compactness via Backward IoU Pruning 

Let Π denote the assembled program (sequence/multiset of operations, including whether each operation is applied as UNION or C UT ), and let Solid(Π) denote the CAD-kernel solid obtained by executing Π. Backward IoU pruning repeatedly removes an operation whose removal yields the largest IoU gain (or smallest IoU drop), and terminates when any removal would decrease IoU. 

Lemma H.2 (Irredundancy of the pruned program) . Let bΠ be the program returned by backward IoU pruning and 

bS = Solid( bΠ) . Then for every operation o ∈ bΠ,

IoU(Solid( bΠ \ { o}), M) < IoU( bS, M),

i.e., removing any single operation strictly decreases IoU. Proof. Backward pruning terminates only when no operation can be removed without decreasing IoU. Hence, at termination, every o ∈ bΠ satisfies the strict inequality above. 

Lemma H.3 (Minimality among IoU-equivalent subsequences of the assembled program) . Let bΠ be the result of backward pruning applied to an initial assembled program Πinit . There is no strict subsequence Π′ ⊂ bΠ such that 

IoU(Solid(Π ′), M) = IoU(Solid( bΠ) , M).

Proof. Assume for contradiction that such Π′ exists. Then some operation o ∈ bΠ \ Π′ can be removed from bΠ without changing IoU, contradicting the termination condition of backward pruning (Lemma H.2). 

Discussion. Theorem H.1 formalizes progressive refinement: under a standard residual progress condition (A3), IoU-guided residual updates reduce symmetric-difference error geometrically down to a floor determined by modeling/candidate limits. Lemmas H.2–H.3 formalize compactness: backward IoU pruning removes all operations that do not contribute to the final IoU, producing an irredundant program that is minimal among IoU-equivalent subsequences of the assembled program. 20 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

I. Sketch Extraction and Profile Formation 

This appendix details the geometric procedures used to extract sketch planes, section loops, and sketch profiles from the input mesh M. All steps are deterministic and independent of learning. 

Algorithm 4 Sketch Plane Extraction and Profile Grouping 

Input: mesh M

Output: sketch profile set G

Detect planar face clusters and axis-aligned slicing planes 

for all sketch planes (o, n) do 

Intersect M with offset planes o ± δn

Extract closed section loops and project to plane Remove degenerate loops Group loops by polygon containment to form profiles 

end for return G

I.1. Sketch Plane Extraction 

Given a mesh M, we construct a finite set of candidate sketch planes using two complementary strategies. 

Planar face-based planes. We cluster triangle normals using angular similarity and retain clusters whose total surface area exceeds a threshold. Each cluster defines a plane with origin ok (centroid of the cluster) and normal nk. To robustly capture boundaries, we slice M using planes at offsets ok ± δnk.

Algorithm 5 Planar Sketch Extraction 

Input: mesh M

Output: planar sketch set Splanar 

Detect planar face clusters {(ok, nk)}Kk=1 in M

for k = 1 to K do 

Define slicing planes at offsets ok ± ϵnk

Intersect M with slicing planes to obtain cross-sections Extract closed boundary loops Lk

if Lk̸ = ∅ then 

Define sketch sk ← (ok, nk, uk, Lk)

Add sk to Splanar 

end if end for return Splanar 

Axis-aligned planes. To capture features not aligned with detected planar faces, we additionally introduce axis-aligned slicing planes. For each axis a ∈ { x, y, z }, we select a fixed number of slice positions {qi} corresponding to quantiles of the mesh extent along a, and define slicing planes (a = qi).21 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Algorithm 6 Axis-Aligned Sketch Extraction 

Input: mesh M

Output: axis-aligned sketch set Saxis 

for all axes a ∈ { x, y, z } do 

Select slice positions {qi} as quantiles of M along axis a

for all slice positions qi do 

Slice M with plane (a = qi)

Extract closed loops Li,a 

Remove degenerate or rectangular loops 

if Li,a ̸ = ∅ then 

Define sketch si,a 

Add si,a to Saxis 

end if end for end for return Saxis 

I.2. Loop Extraction and Projection 

For each slicing plane (o, n), we intersect M with nearby offset planes and extract closed polygonal loops. Each loop is projected back onto the original sketch plane and represented in a local 2D coordinate system. Loops are resampled to a fixed number of ordered points and filtered using area and minimum-length thresholds to remove degenerate cases. 

I.3. Profile Grouping by Containment 

Extracted loops may correspond to outer boundaries and interior holes. We construct a polygon containment graph in the sketch plane and group each outer loop with its contained inner loops. Each resulting group defines a sketch profile suitable for CAD operations. 

Algorithm 7 Loop Grouping by Containment 

Input: sketch set S

Output: profile group set G

for all sketches s ∈ S do 

Project all loops in s to the sketch plane Construct polygon containment graph Identify outer loops and their contained inner loops 

for all outer loops do 

Form profile group g with associated inner loops Add g to G

end for end for return G

J. Sketch Primitive Fitting 

Each sketch profile consists of an ordered set of 2D points L2D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 lying in a sketch plane. We approximate 

L2D using a compact sequence of parametric primitives to obtain an executable CAD sketch. Given a point subset P ⊂ R2, we evaluate candidate fits for: (i) line segments via least-squares fitting, (ii) circles and arcs via algebraic circle fitting with RMS error constraints, and (iii) splines as a fallback representation. Segments are greedily grown until fitting error exceeds a tolerance relative to the loop scale. Adjacent colinear primitives are merged to reduce fragmentation. The output is a sequence of primitives S(L) that approximates the original loop within tolerance and preserves loop topology. 22 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

Pseudo-code for the full segmentation procedure is provided in Algorithm. 

K. Geometry-Driven Operation Parameter Search 

This appendix details the continuous parameter selection procedure used to generate discrete E XTRUDE and R EVOLVE 

candidates from a sketch profile. 

Algorithm 8 Geometry-Driven Candidate Generation 

Input: sketch profile g, mesh surface points Q(M)

Output: candidate set Cg

Sweep extrusion heights and identify stable intervals Canonicalize signed intervals and add extrusion candidates 

if profile g is symmetric then 

Evaluate full revolutions about candidate axes Add best revolve candidate 

end if return Cg

K.1. One-Sided Chamfer Distance 

Let Q(M) = {yj } denote a surface point cloud sampled from M. For an operation o(g, θ ) applied to sketch profile g

with parameters θ, let P (g, θ ) = {xi} denote points sampled from the induced surface. We define the one-sided Chamfer Distance: 

D(θ) = 1

|P (g, θ )|

X 

> x∈P(g,θ )

min  

> y∈Q(M)

∥x − y∥22. (8) 

K.2. Extrusion Interval Selection 

For E XTRUDE , the parameter θ = h denotes a signed extrusion height along the sketch normal. We evaluate the Chamfer objective D(h) on a uniformly sampled, bounded interval h ∈ [hmin , h max ]. To identify geometrically valid extrusion ranges, we perform a monotonic error sweep and detect sharp increases in D(h) using finite-difference slope estimates. Specifically, we mark a boundary at h⋆ when the discrete derivative 

D(hi+1 ) − D (hi)

hi+1 − hi

exceeds a fixed threshold, indicating the onset of geometric overshoot. Contiguous regions preceding such boundaries with D(h) ≤ ϵ are treated as stable intervals and merged when adjacent. From these, we retain two canonical candidates: (i) the smallest stable interval containing h = 0 and (ii) the largest stable interval. If a stable interval spans h− < 0 < h +, we reparameterize the extrusion by translating the sketch plane origin by 

h− n and using height h+ − h−.

K.3. Revolution Axis Selection 

For R EVOLVE , candidates are restricted to full 360 ◦ revolutions. We generate a finite set of axis hypotheses consisting of the principal axes of the loop point distribution and four additional axes rotated by 45 ◦. For each axis a, we evaluate D(a) and select the axis minimizing the Chamfer objective. 

L. Learning-Based Sketch Prior 

To reduce the number of sketch profiles considered during optimization, we train a binary classifier that predicts whether a sketch profile contributes to the recovered CAD program. 

Training data. Given a recovered program Π⋆, profiles used by operations in Π⋆ are labeled positive, and remaining 23 CADFit: Precise Mesh-to-CAD Program Generation with Hybrid Optimization 

extracted profiles are labeled negative. Overall, we collect approximately 10 5 labeled sketch profiles, generated automatically without human annotation. 

Model. The classifier computes a probability f (M, g ) ∈ [0 , 1] from a joint visual representation of the 3D shape and the candidate sketch loop. We render multi-view images of the mesh M and overlay the sketch loop g on each view. The resulting images are passed through a DINO encoder to obtain a global visual embedding. This embedding is then fed into a lightweight 3-layer MLP with ReLU activations and a sigmoid output to predict compatibility. 

Usage. At inference time, each sketch profile is independently selected with probability p = f (Q(M), g ).

M. Fillet and Chamfer Recovery 

Given a reconstructed solid S, we identify candidate edges for secondary features. For each edge, we apply a small test FILLET or C HAMFER operation and evaluate the resulting IoU. If IoU improves, the feature parameter (radius or length) is refined via one-dimensional line search to maximize IoU with M.24