Title: Better than Average: Spatially-Aware Aggregation of Segmentation Uncertainty Improves Downstream Performance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29941v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 01:25:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Better than Average: Spatially-Aware Aggregation of Segmentation Uncertainty Improves Downstream Performance 

Vanessa Emanuela Guarino 1,2,5,∗,B Claudia Winklmayr 1,2,5,∗ Jannik Franzen 1,2,3,5,∗

Josef Lorenz Rumberger 1,2,3,4 Manuel Pfeuffer 4 Sonja Greven 4 Klaus Maier-Hein 2,6,7

Carsten T. L¨ uth 2,6,7,† Christoph Karg 1,2,† Dagmar Kainmueller 1,2,5,†,B 

> 1

Max-Delbr¨ uck-Center (MDC) 2 Helmholtz Imaging 3 Charit´ e Universit¨ atsmedizin  

> 4

Humboldt-Universit¨ at zu Berlin 5 University of Potsdam  

> 6

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) 7 Heidelberg University    

> B{firstnames.surname }@mdc-berlin.de ∗/†

equal contribution 

Abstract 

Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is crucial for ensuring the reliability of automated image segmentations in safety-critical domains like biomedical image analysis or au-tonomous driving. In segmentation, UQ generates pixel-wise uncertainty scores that must be aggregated into image-level scores for downstream tasks like Out-of-Distribution (OoD) or failure detection. Despite routine use of aggrega-tion strategies, their properties and impact on downstream task performance have not yet been comprehensively stud-ied. Global Average is the default choice, yet it does not account for spatial and structural features of segmentation uncertainty. Alternatives like patch-, class- and threshold-based strategies exist, but lack systematic comparison, lead-ing to inconsistent reporting and unclear best practices. We address this gap by (1) formally analyzing properties, lim-itations, and pitfalls of common strategies; (2) proposing novel strategies that incorporate spatial uncertainty struc-ture and (3) benchmarking their performance on OoD and failure detection across ten datasets that vary in image ge-ometry and structure. We find that aggregators leveraging spatial structure yield stronger performance in both down-stream tasks studied. However, the performance of individ-ual aggregators depends heavily on dataset characteristics, so we (4) propose a meta-aggregator that integrates multi-ple aggregators and performs robustly across datasets. 

1. Introduction 

Reliable image segmentation is essential in safety-critical domains such as biomedicine [1, 36] and autonomous driv-ing [32, 43, 76], where inaccurate predictions can have se-vere consequences. A key strategy to enhance reliability is estimating a model’s confidence for any given segmen-tation, enabling the detection of highly uncertain samples that may require expert review, further training, or exclusion from deployment. In segmentation, Uncertainty Quantifi-cation (UQ) methods produce pixelwise uncertainty scores [32, 33, 46], which must be aggregated into image-level scalar values to support downstream decision-making. In the following, we refer to any function performing this aggregation as an Aggregation Strategy (AggS). Two of the most commonly performed and essential tasks requir-ing the aggregation of pixelwise uncertainty are Out-of-Distribution (OoD) Detection , where the goal is to iden-tify samples that fall outside the distribution of the train-ing data [31, 82], and Failure Detection (FD), which flags segmentations that may require manual correction or exclu-sion [25]. In both cases, the underlying hypothesis is that risky samples can be identified via a high aggregated un-certainty score. In practice, the aggregation of pixelwise uncertainties has received limited attention, with the global average (AVG) across all pixels being the default choice [20, 44, 54, 81]. In the context of segmentation, however, a sample’s OoD-ness or susceptibility to prediction errors is often reflected in localized uncertainty patterns, for example in regions containing unseen object classes or ambiguous boundary delineations. Such local variations are prone to being overlooked when uncertainty is aggregated via sim-ple pixelwise averaging, underscoring the need for targeted AggSs that account for image context or spatial structure. Although multiple studies in object detection, medical imaging, and autonomous driving have highlighted the im-portance of targeted AggSs, most proposed methods are narrowly tailored to specific tasks, lack formal theoretical support, and frequently rely on intermediate model outputs              

> arXiv:2603.29941v1 [cs.CV] 31 Mar 2026 Figure 1. Aggregation strategies (AggS). (a) An AggS reduces an uncertainty map to a single scalar score. (b) Empirical evaluation of AggSs. Choosing an appropriate AggS is challenging and highly task-dependent. Hence, we benchmark different strategies in the context of OoD- and failure detection over different datasets. (c) Limitations of individual AggSs. Pixel-wise strategies, in particular, have key shortcomings e.g . 1. AVG ignores spatial structure ; 2. AQA lacks proportional invariance ; and 3. ATA is not monotonic (see Supp. A for more details). (d) Subtypes of AggSs. Beyond pixel-wise AggSs, we also explore spatially-aware approaches—such as prediction-based and spatial AggSs, which measure the fraction of uncertainty mass within structured regions of the uncertainty map. Finally, we consider Meta-AggSs, which combine intensity-based and spatial strategies by fitting a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).

or ad hoc definitions of “relevance”, limiting their general-izability [1, 58, 60, 73]. To date, a systematic evaluation of how different AggSs impact downstream performance is still missing, and so are respective best practices. To address the lack of systematic studies on uncertainty ag-gregation, we first identify the most commonly used Ag-gSs in the literature. As none of these methods explicitly account for the spatial distribution of uncertainty, we sub-sequently propose three novel, spatially informed AggSs, grounded in theoretically well-established measures for an-alyzing spatial relationships in grayscale images, including Moran’s I [47], Shannon Entropy [67], and the Edge Den-sity score [57]. Wherever possible, we discuss theoretical properties of the AggSs and then empirically benchmark their behavior in OoD and Failure Detection. The bench-mark comprises 10 datasets spanning diverse modalities, in-cluding street scenes, medical imaging, and synthetic data, covering both grayscale and multi-channel inputs, and en-compassing semantic and instance segmentation tasks. Our evaluation confirms that global averaging is subopti-mal. More broadly, we find that no single AggS consis-tently outperforms others across all experimental settings; rather, the effectiveness of an AggS depends strongly on the dataset and task. To address this limitation, we propose a meta-aggregation strategy (GMM-All), which combines multiple individual AggSs and demonstrates robust perfor-mance across diverse scenarios, making it a reliable default choice when there is insufficient knowledge about the rele-vant uncertainty characteristics in OoD- or potential failure-cases to make an informed choice. In summary, our work provides the first systematic com-parison of AggSs and establishes a foundation for optimiz-ing downstream task performance through principled uncer-tainty aggregation in segmentation. To summarize our Contributions: 

• We extensively benchmark the behavior of common Ag-gSs on a wide variety of practically relevant datasets. • We introduce spatial AggSs that are able to capture the spatial patterns of uncertainty estimates. • We propose GMM-All, a new all-purpose AggS com-bining intensity- and spatial aspects of uncertainty maps. GMM-All performs competitively on downstream tasks, outperforming baselines for OoD- and failure detection on many datasets. • We provide an open-source Python library for un-certainty aggregation: https : / / github . com / Kainmueller-Lab/aggrigator .22. Related Work 

Pixel-score Uncertainty Quantification Segmentation models take an input image I of size m × n and pre-dict for each pixel a probability distribution p(c) over a set of classes c ∈ { 1, . . . , K }. Assigning each pixel to its most probable class yields a segmentation mask M ∈{1, . . . , K }m×n. Depending on the task, classes may rep-resent semantic categories ( e.g ., road, building, person) or distinguish individual object instances, as in semantic , in-stance , or panoptic segmentation. UQ methods for segmen-tation [22, 73] typically assign an uncertainty score to each pixel which reflects the model’s confidence in the predicted class or instance, resulting in an uncertainty map U .

Pixel-score Out-of-Distribution Detection OoD detection identifies inputs that deviate from a model’s training distri-bution, relying on the assumption that models should ex-press low confidence on unfamiliar samples. Many ap-proaches for OoD detection were first developed for clas-sification with Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) as the initial measure of unreliability [28]. This was extended by sample-based Bayesian methods leveraging predictive uncertainty [21, 35, 53], forming the dominant output-based paradigm later applied to segmentation [2, 28, 32, 35, 50]. Other approaches include distance-based metrics in latent space [37, 69], density-based likelihood estima-tion [3, 5, 51, 59], and reconstruction errors from auxil-iary encoder-decoder models [17, 80], mostly suitable for anomaly segmentation [9]. Our framework combines out-put - and density-based concepts, operating post-hoc on fea-tures derived from pixelwise uncertainty maps. This makes it model-agnostic, applicable to alternative uncertainty rep-resentations such as reconstruction-based generative model [10], without relying on latent spaces or specialized training schemes [5, 37, 51]. 

Pixel-score Failure Detection FD assigns a confidence score per image (iD or OoD) to flag potential segmenta-tion errors, and when this score is used to abstain or re-tain predictions, it constitutes selective classification (SC). Standard baselines rely on MSP, refined via thresholding for user-specified risk levels [24]. Classification-based con-fidence methods have also been adapted to FD, e.g ., us-ing ensembles [61] or joint prediction–rejection training [29]. Unlike classification, however, ideal confidence func-tions for segmentation remain less established. While ex-isting image-level FD methods primarily focus on segmen-tation quality estimation [34, 77] or distribution shift de-tection, the SC literature has historically emphasized eval-uation metrics, improving the accuracy-coverage tradeoff [24] with recent extensions to selective accuracy across all coverage levels [71]. A newer trend empirically adapts classification-based scores to generate pixel -level or com-ponent -level uncertainty estimates [45, 52], yet partial re-jections offer limited benefit in practice, as specialists must then review the image. While some works evaluate sub-sets of AggSs in biomedical settings [1, 82], our work is the first to systematically compare AggSs and introduce a meta-strategy that enables the effective empirical use of SC. 

3. Methodology 

3.1. Common aggregation strategies 

An aggregation strategy f summarizes a 2D uncertainty map U into a single scalar f (U ) ∈ R. Common AggSs are 

intensity-based , quantifying the magnitude of uncertainty in U , typically through averaging. Among these, pixel-wise methods utilize only the uncertainty values, while 

prediction-based methods leverage segmentation outputs to compute class-aware uncertainty scores, allowing for better sensitivity to localized uncertainty. This approach also applies to other contextual inputs such as ground truth labels, error maps, or depth cues. Pixelwise AggSs are among the most widely used approaches due to their simplicity and ease of implementation [31, 42, 58, 81]. 

Global Average (AVG) is the average score taken across all pixelwise uncertainty scores ui. Patch-Level Maximum Average (PLM) operates by sliding a fixed-size patch across the image, computing the average pixel intensity within each patch, and subsequently taking the maximum value over all patch positions. Above-Threshold Average (ATA) is defined as the average across all ui > T with a fixed threshold T > 0. If no values surpass T , the aggregated score is defined as zero. Above-Quantile Average (AQA) is the average across all uncertainty values above a fixed 

q-quantile for q ∈ (0 , 1) . In other words, it averages the top 

1 − q values, independently of magnitude. Using a predicted segmentation mask M ∈{1, 2, ...K }m×n a class-level average αc can be cal-culated as the average uncertainty score taken across all pixels assigned to class c by the mask M . For a weight vector w ∈ [0 , 1] K satisfying PKc=1 wc = 1 we further define the Weighted Class Average as PKc=1 wcαc. Note, that all class-level averages studied here exclude the background-class. For specific choices of w we obtain the following common prediction-based AggS [7, 74]: 

Balanced Class Average (BCA) weighs each class average equally, i.e. by setting all weights wc := 1 /K . Imbal-anced Class Average (ICA) weighs each class score by the relative proportion of the class, i.e. by setting all weights 

wc := Ac/ PKc=1 Ac, where Ac is the number of pix-els assigned to class c. Above-Quantile Average for Fore-ground Ratio (QFR) is defined as the average uncertainty among the top qF G uncertain pixels. It uses the predicted segmentation mask to calculate the foreground (FG) ratio 

qF G = number of FG pixels total number of pixels . This ensures that the average is computed over the most uncertain pixels, in a proportion that matches the relative size of the foreground [31]. 33.2. Pitfalls of common Aggregation Strategies 

Intensity-based AggSs are susceptible to the following pit-falls as illustrated in Figure 1c: (1) AggSs that are not 

sensitive to spatial structure assign identical scores to dis-tinct spatial patterns, such as uniform low-uncertainty ver-sus compact regions of high uncertainty. This includes all averaging AggSs, notably AVG, which are therefore unsuit-able for detecting small but relevant uncertain regions or un-certainty concentrated along object boundaries. (2) AggSs lacking proportion invariance yield scores that vary with the relative amount of low-uncertainty background. For ex-ample, AQA produces higher aggregated uncertainty when background pixels are cropped away, even though the ac-tual high-uncertainty regions remain unchanged. (3) AggSs which are not monotonic , as is the case for ATA, fail to cap-ture a global increase of pixelwise uncertainty values, and more importantly, may even reduce the resulting score. We provide formal definitions and a deeper analysis of these properties as well as a detailed discussion of the respective pitfalls in Supp. A. 

3.3. Spatial aggregation strategies 

In order to address the lack of spatial awareness in intensity-based AggSs and explicitly study spatial patterns in uncer-tainty maps we draw on the following established methods designed to capture structural patterns such as clustering, noise, or edges in grayscale images. Moran’s I [47] mea-sures spatial autocorrelation by quantifying how similar in-tensity values are in a local neighborhood; Edge Density Score [57] captures the presence of spatial boundaries by computing the density of edges in a local window; (Shan-non) Entropy [67] reflects the local randomness or hetero-geneity of intensity values. We propose to leverage spatial measures as ”aggregators” of uncertainty by calculating a spatial mass ratio (SMR) 

i.e. the fraction of total uncertainty mass that is concen-trated in regions with high local spatial structure. SMR is determined by weighting the uncertainty map with pixel-wise spatial scores computed from a sliding window and dividing the average uncertainty in regions with high spa-tial measure by the overall average uncertainty, resulting in an interpretable score between 0 and 1 (see Supp. B): SMR Moran (or MOR) equals 0 if all uncertainty lies in noise-like regions, and 1 if it is entirely concentrated in clusters. SMR EDS (or EDS) equals 0 if all uncertainty lies in flat re-gions, and 1 if it is entirely concentrated along edges. SMR Entropy (or ENT) equals 0 if all uncertainty lies in re-gions of almost constant uncertainty, and 1 if it is fully con-centrated in areas with high variability. See Figure 2 for an illustration of how MOR and EDS capture different spatial uncertainty patterns across dataset samples. 

3.4. Meta-aggregation 

To unify spatial and intensity-based AggSs and faithfully capture heterogeneous aspects of uncertainty maps, we model aggregated scores resulting from different AggSs as descriptive features of an uncertainty map U . Specif-ically, given a set of d aggregation functions f1, . . . , f d,we represent each uncertainty map U as a feature vector 

fU = ( f1(U ), . . . , f d(U )) ∈ Rd, where fi(U ) represents a single aggregated score. The key idea is that in-distribution (iD) samples occupy a specific region in this feature space, and uncertainty maps whose feature vectors lie outside this region are likely to be OoD or failures (see Figure 1). We assume that the iD feature vectors follow a multivari-ate distribution which we describe with a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [16]. We use a subset of known iD uncer-tainty maps Uf it  

> iD

(separate from the set for evaluation) to fit and estimate the optimal number of GMM-modes based on the Bayesian Information Criterion [66] leading to our final density function pGMM (u) (see Supp. G for details). We then define our meta-aggregation strategy as the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the features: 

fmeta (U ; pGMM ) := − ln pGMM (fU ).

The definition of the meta-aggregator depends on the set of AggSs used as input features. We consider three main variants: (a) GMM-Spa , which includes only spatial mea-sures; (b) GMM-Int , based solely on intensity-based strate-gies; and (c) GMM-All , which combines both spatial and intensity-based features. For a detailed discussion of the se-lection of strategies and the corresponding ablation studies, see Supp. G. 

4. Experimental Setups & Results 

4.1. Implementation Details 

We generate segmentations across diverse datasets using a range of network architecture, including U-Net 3D, U-Net, HoVer-NeXt, HRNet and DeepLabv3+ (for details on model training, see Supp. D). To estimate pixel-wise un-certainty, we focus on the widely used and computationally efficient Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) [21]. By performing stochastic forward passes with dropout activated during in-ference, MCD captures epistemic uncertainty, which is par-ticularly relevant for downstream tasks such as OoD detec-tion and FD [32]. Furthermore, we explicitly normalize all uncertainty maps such that U ∈ [0 , 1] m×n (cf. Supp. F). While alternative UQ methods or segmentation backbones may yield different uncertainty distributions, the aggrega-tion behavior we investigate remains largely unaffected. To support this claim, we replicate our experiments using addi-tional UQ methods, using other UQ methods, namely MSP, Deep Ensembles [35] and Test Time Augmentations [49]. 4Figure 2. Structural diversity of datasets. The scatterplot illus-trates structural diversity by projecting uncertainty maps into the space of two SMR scores: MOR and EDS. High MOR indicates clustered uncertainty (low: noise), while high EDS reflects edge-localized uncertainty (low: flat regions). Notably, EDS effectively identifies OoD samples in CAR-ID/CAR-CS. 

The corresponding results are reported in Supp. C, where we observe consistent trends across methods. 

4.2. Datasets 

In order to assess whether AggSs capture relevant aspects of uncertainty, we require not only structurally diverse uncer-tainty maps but also multiple OoD settings encompassing both covariate and semantic shifts [48]). We briefly sum-marize the tasks, datasets, and iD/OoD setups below; full details are provided in Supp. D. 

Segmentation of nuclei in pathology images: We use the synthetic Arctique (ARC) histopathology dataset [19] as iD data and derive two perturbed variants as OoD: (1) ARC-Nuc, where nuclei intensities are reduced (analyzed for instance segmentation), and (2) ARC-BC, where the red blood cell count is increased (analyzed for semantic seg-mentation). In ARC-Nuc, uncertainty is expected around the boundaries of ”hard-to-identify” nuclei; in ARC-BC, it is concentrated in localized regions (“blobs”) where red blood cells may be semantically mistaken for eosinophils. We also use the Lizard dataset [26] taking data from five medical centers as iD (LIZ) and from a sixth center as OoD (LIZ-G). We evaluate both semantic and instance segmen-tation, denoting the OoD sets as LIZ-SG (semantic) and LIZ-IG (instance). Here, the shift arises from variations in the recording protocol,1 affecting tissue appearance and in-creasing overall object uncertainty. 

Binary segmentation of lung nodules in CT volumes: 

Following [31], the LIDC dataset [4] is partitioned into sub-sets based on (1) textural changes in lung nodules (LIDC-Tex) and (2) high-grade malignant nodules (LIDC-Mal), both used as OoD data. The task involves binary segmen-tation of tumors versus background. Both OoD shifts in-crease intra-tumoral uncertainty due to texture variations; additionally, larger malignant tumors increase the surface area of elevated uncertainty in the 2D slices. 

Binary segmentation of microorganisms in microscopy images: The C. Elegans live and dead assay [40] (WORM) is used as the iD dataset. Two subsets of the SinfNet dataset [65], depicting different breeds of microorganisms, are used as OoD data: (1) the Protist subset (WORM-Pro) and (2) the Nematode subset (WORM-Nem). The task is foreground–background segmentation, where the OoD datasets contain individual microorganisms whose morpho-logical shapes differ substantially from C. Elegans, leading to localized, clustered regions of elevated uncertainty. 

Semantic segmentation of urban street scenes: The syn-thetic GTA dataset [62], derived from video game footage, is used as the iD dataset (CAR-ID), and the Cityscapes dataset [13], consisting of real-world urban scenes filmed from a car’s perspective, as the OoD dataset (CAR-CS). The task is semantic segmentation, where the transition from synthetic to real-world imagery leads to an overall in-crease in boundary uncertainty, with uncertainty in CAR-CS appearing more spatially diffuse. Notably, in the CAR-ID data, total uncertainty is high yet localized, particularly around unlabeled or underrepresented classes ( e.g . the front of the ego vehicle), emphasizing the necessity of spatially informed aggregation (cf. Fig. 2). 

Semantic segmentation of multispectral crop images: 

We use the Weedsgalore dataset [8] (WEED), containing drone images of maize and several weed species, as iD data. The Crop and Weed dataset [68], captured under di-verse soil conditions with handheld cameras, serves as the OoD dataset (WEED-Hand). The task is 3-class semantic segmentation (crops, weeds, background). The OoD set includes additional weed species with previously unseen shapes and textures, leading to elevated uncertainty in re-gions with unfamiliar morphologies. 

Dataset Diversity according to Spatial Measures In Fig-ure 2, we show the aggregated scores of uncertainty maps projected into the space defined by the spatial AggSs EDS and MOR. Scores from the same dataset are highlighted in color, illustrating that they occupy distinct regions in fea-5Figure 3. Performance on OoD Detection. Higher AUROC (0.6–1.0) indicates better iD–OoD separation. AggSs are ranked by their mean AUROC, computed over 500 bootstrap samples per dataset and then averaged across datasets for stability. Ranking robustness is assessed via one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests at 5%, showing that prediction-based BCA and ICA, along with GMM-based methods, form a statistically dominant tier ( p < 

> 0.05 ). Numbers after AggS labels indicate method-specific pa-rameters (cf. Supp. A.1). Full analysis, including additional UQ methods and confidence intervals, is in Supp. C.

ture space. In this visualization, CAR-ID and CAR-CS are clearly separable along the EDS dimension. The example images reveal the underlying cause: the unfamiliar CAR-CS images produce noticeably “blurrier” uncertainty pat-terns, resulting in lower EDS values. Additional examples can be found in Supp. D. 

4.3. On OoD Detection Performance 

For an AggS to be effective in OoD detection, it should as-sign higher aggregated uncertainty to OoD samples than to iD samples. Following [28], we construct balanced sets of iD and OoD samples and evaluate performance using the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC) [15] (cf. Supp. E for further details). Figure 3 summarizes our benchmark results, with AggSs ranked by their mean performance computed over 500 bootstrap sam-ples from each test dataset, to account for variability in the evaluation data. Top performers by average rank are 

prediction-based BCA, ICA, and our GMM-All , supporting our claim that it offers robust performance across datasets when no single AggS is clearly preferred. Ranking robust-ness is further assessed via one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests at 5%, confirming that while no AggS is universally dominant, BCA, ICA, and GMM-All form a statistically sig-nificant top tier ( p < 0.05 ) [78]. Full confidence analyses are provided in Supp. C. In 6 of 10 scenarios, AVG performs poorly, approaching random guessing. Notably, it excels on LIDC-Mal, where larger malignant nodules and elevated intra-nodule uncer-tainty favor prediction-unaware aggregators, and performs competitively on LIZ-IG and LIZ-SG, due to high back-ground noise and dense ring-like structures in the OoD scene, as well as on CAR-CS, where the presence of seman-tic classes not learned from in CAR-ID leads to increase in the total uncertainty. Although AQA and PLM often corre-late with AVG, PLM outperforms the latter in WORM-Pro, where clustered uncertainty introduced by protists domi-nates the background. Finally, ATA methods consistently underperform, ranking last on average, possibly due to their 

non-monotonic relationship with increased pixelwise uncer-tainty. Notably, GMM-All , GMM-Int , and GMM-Spa strug-gle with iD/OoD separation in LIZ-IG and LIZ-SG, though marginal-based separation succeed. We hypothesize that similar marginal feature performance prevents the GMM from finding a clear separation in high-dimensional space. To further evaluate robustness, Figure 4c–d compares the AUROC of GMM-All (flat black line) against leave-one-out variants (top panel) and fits on individual AggSs (bottom panel) across CAR-CS, LIZ-IG, WEED-Hand and WORM-Nem (cf. Supp. G.3 for details and results). Using all AggSs generally matches or outperforms individual features in 3 of 4 cases, with minimal impact from removing specific ones. Exceptions occur when a feature dominates ( e.g ., EDS for CAR-CS, marked as Tukey outlier [72]). Figure 4d com-plements the ablations by showing SHAP values [41], av-eraged across samples (i.e., absolute), computed from the NLL values of GMM-All fitted on all AggSs: while the 

GMM-All ’s ability to detect OoD samples is largely driven by EDS in CAR, all AggSs contribute positively for WEED and WORM. As hypothesized, in LIZ-IG, GMM-All fails to find a clear separation for some AggSs, and even when sep-aration exists, feature variability across iD and OoD sam-ples prevents concentrated, unidirectional contributions. 

4.4. On Failure Detection Performance 

We evaluate FD using SC metrics, discarding predictions based on aggregated uncertainty and measuring the result-ing missegmentation risk with a task-specific metric [25]. 6Figure 4. GMM Robustness for OoD Detection. (a) Fitting a GMM enables spatial methods to act as AggSs, capturing subtle non-linear changes in uncertainty maps. (b) Qualitative examples showing that effective AggSs for iD–OoD separation are data-dependent. (c) GMM-All AUROC: leave-one-out (top) and individual fitting (bottom) on a subset (CAR-CS, LIZ-IG, WEED-Hand, and WORM-Nem split). Using all AggSs generally matches or outperforms individual ones in 3 cases, with minimal impact from removing specific ones. Exceptions occur when a feature dominates ( e.g ., EDS for CAR-CS, marked as Tukey outlier) or when features lack discriminative power. (d) GMM-All AUROC: absolute SHAP values. Positive values indicate that an AggS aids GMM-All in separating iD–OoD; bi-directional or null contributions reduce performance (e.g., in LIZ-IG). SHAP values are shown for the same subsets as in (c). 

Following Kahl et al. [31], we adopt (1 − Dice ), analogous to the misclassification rate in classification. The Selective Risk–Coverage curve relates the fraction of retained predic-tions (coverage) to the corresponding selective risk. Since we compare AggSs only, keeping the model and absolute risk fixed, we assess reliability using the Excess Area Un-der the Risk–Coverage Curve (E-AURC, [25, 30]), thereby focusing on ranking quality (cf. Supp. E for its derivation). Figure 5 shows selected risk-curves together with the mean rank performance. As for OoD Detection, the GMM is fitted on iD features and we use the same bootstrapping procedure for statistical robustness (cf. Supp. Sec. C). Evaluation of all AggSs is performed on OoD and iD data combined, for conciseness we refer to the combined dataset by the OoD label. The difference between the exemplary selective risk-coverage curves in Figure 5a is striking: on LIZ, segmen-tation suffers from silent failures , i.e. samples confidently misclassified, but GMM-All , GMM-Spa , and GMM-Int mit-igate this by filtering uncertain samples without raising mis-classification risk. On WEED-Hand, these scores minimize E-AURC by effectively removing the most uncertain, error-prone predictions. The curves also highlight AVG’s generally poor perfor-mance, ranking lowest (see Supp. C for mean rank tables and detailed comparisons) due to underestimating uncer-tainty on fully misclassified samples, except for synthetic datasets like CAR and ARC, where silent failures are rare and misclassified instances mostly correspond to OoD sam-ples. In contrast, although ATA ranks low for OoD de-tection, it performs well for FD, particularly on WORM-Nem and ARC-Nuc, where segmentation errors concentrate around high-uncertainty object boundaries, allowing even low-threshold ATA to align closely with the error. Across datasets, GMM-All , GMM-Spa , and GMM-Int scores per-form comparably to the top-ranked QFR, which surpasses BCA and ICA by applying an object-size–independent threshold that targets the most uncertain regions (typically object boundaries), achieving the highest statistical perfor-mance ( p < 0.01 , Wilcoxon test; cf. Supp. C). ICA’s poor performance is due to segmentation errors which frequently arise in small objects. Notably, E-AURC rankings for all GMM-based scores invert relative to AUROC on LIZ-IG, LIZ-SG, and WORM-Nem. This reversal occurs because samples on the outer GMM iso-density contours correspond 7Figure 5. Performance on FD. (a) Exemplary Selective Risk-Coverage curves . (b) E-AURC scores . Lower values indicate better alignment between uncertainty and prediction errors. AggSs are ranked by their mean E-AURC, computed over 500 bootstrap samples per dataset and then averaged across datasets for stability. Ranking robustness is assessed via one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests at 5%, showing that prediction-based QFR shows statistically significant improvement over all other AggSs ( p < 0.001 ), followed by BCA and GMM-based methods ( p < 0.05 ). Full analysis, including additional UQ methods and confidence intervals, is in Supp. C. 

to high segmentation errors but not to OoD samples, affect-ing E-AURC but not AUROC. Similar to ARC, this drop is mainly due to GMM-Spa ’s wide support (see WORM’s SMRs in Figure 2), which weakens the correlation between distance to the mode and segmentation error. 

4.5. On Overall Downstream Performance 

Overall, we observe substantial variability in the perfor-mance of different AggSs, confirming that the choice of AggS strongly depends on both the dataset and the task. Prediction-based aggregators consistently rank among the top performers, underscoring the importance of the 

proportion-invariance property that they satisfy. Our pro-posed GMM-All , GMM-Spa , and GMM-Int also perform strongly, affirming their role as robust general aggregation strategies. Overall, their performance is highly correlated across datasets. GMM-All outperforms its ablated versions (GMM-Spa and GMM-Int ) in both tasks, confirming that combining intensity and structural-based features of uncer-tainty maps enhances performance. Conversely, pixel-wise AggSs such as AVG, AQA, PLM, and ATA show less stable performance across both tasks and datasets. Notably, AVG, the baseline, ranks among the lowest-performing methods for both OoD detection and FD, which supports the claim that it should not be the default choice for aggregation. 

5. Conclusion 

Our results indicate that the effectiveness of intensity-based aggregators strongly depends on dataset properties such as object size, structure, and foreground proportion, and that the commonly used AVG can obscure critical information, making it a suboptimal default for both OoD detection and FD. Aggregators that explicitly incorporate spatial features consistently outperform by preserving structural cues that intensity-only methods would otherwise discard. Conse-quently, selecting an AggS that reflects spatial and struc-tural characteristics is crucial. When this is not feasible, our meta-aggregation strategy offers a robust alternative by combining diverse aggregators and leveraging spatial struc-ture to capture a richer set of uncertainty features. This ap-proach, however, assumes that the aggregated scores follow a suitable distribution ( e.g . a GMM) and requires a suffi-ciently large and representative iD set to ensure stable per-formance (See Supp. H for a detailed discussion). 8Acknowledgements 

We would like to express our gratitude to Jeremias Traub for helpful discussion and insights regarding failure detec-tion metrics and to Kim-Celine Kahl for her support with the LIDC/LIDC-Mal & -Tex and CAR-ID/CAR-CS exper-iments. This work was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) Research Training Group CompCancer (RTG2424), DFG Research Unit DeSBi (KI-FOR 5363, project no. 459422098), DFG Collaborative Research Cen-ter FONDA (SFB 1404, project no. 414984028), DFG Indi-vidual Research Grant UMDISTO (project no. 498181230), Synergy Unit of the Helmholtz Foundation Model Initia-tive, and supported by the Helmholtz Einstein International Berlin Research School In Data Science (HEIBRiDS). 

Contribution Statement 

VEG, CW, JF, CK, CL, and DK collaboratively conceptu-alized the research question, designed the methodology and the principal experiments. VEG conducted the experiments on OoD-detection and FD and handled statistical evalua-tion. CW collected and defined aggregation strategies and devised spatial measures. JF co-prototyped and ablated the meta-aggregation strategy, led result reporting and visual-ization, and released the package. CK analyzed key prop-erties and pitfalls of aggregation strategies and developed the aggregation code-base. VEG, CW, and CK collected datasets and evaluated pixelwise uncertainty maps. CL pro-vided code and data for the CAR and LIDC datasets. MP and SG provided valuable feedback on the design of the GMM and the statistical evaluation. JLR contributed to the code and prepared the repository for publication. VEG, CW, JF, JLR, CK, CL and DK contributed to manuscript preparation. VEG, CK, CL, and DK supervised the project and KMH provided overall guidance. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. 

References 

[1] Jungo Alain, Balsiger Fabian, and Reyes Mauricio. Ana-lyzing the quality and challenges of uncertainty estimations for brain tumor segmentation. Frontiers in neuroscience , 14: 282, 2020. 1, 2, 3 [2] Vijay Badrinarayanan Alex Kendall and Roberto Cipolla. Bayesian segnet: Model uncertainty in deep convolutional encoder-decoder architectures for scene understanding. In 

Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , pages 57.1–57.12. BMVA Press, 2017. 3 [3] Siddharth Ancha, Philip R. Osteen, and Nicholas Roy. Deep evidential uncertainty estimation for semantic segmentation under out-of-distribution obstacles. In 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 6943–6951, 2024. 3 [4] Samuel G Armato III, Geoffrey McLennan, Luc Bidaut, Michael F McNitt-Gray, Charles R Meyer, Anthony P Reeves, Binsheng Zhao, Denise R Aberle, Claudia I Hen-schke, Eric A Hoffman, et al. The lung image database con-sortium (lidc) and image database resource initiative (idri): a completed reference database of lung nodules on ct scans. 

Medical physics , 38(2):915–931, 2011. 5, 19 [5] Fabio Arnez, Daniel Alfonso Montoya Vasquez, Ansgar Ra-dermacher, and Franc ¸ois Terrier. Latent representation en-tropy density for distribution shift detection. In Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intel-ligence , pages 110–137. PMLR, 2024. 3 [6] Elias Baumann, Bastian Dislich, Josef Lorenz Rumberger, Iris D Nagtegaal, Maria Rodriguez Martinez, and Inti Zlobec. Hover-next: A fast nuclei segmentation and classifi-cation pipeline for next generation histopathology. In Medi-cal Imaging with Deep Learning , 2024. 19 [7] Robin Camarasa, Daniel Bos, Jeroen Hendrikse, Paul Ned-erkoorn, M. Eline Kooi, Aad van der Lugt, and Marleen de Bruijne. A quantitative comparison of epistemic uncertainty maps applied to multi-class segmentation. Machine Learn-ing for Biomedical Imaging , 1(UNSURE2020):1–39, 2021. 3[8] Ekin Celikkan, Timo Kunzmann, Yertay Yeskaliyev, Sibylle Itzerott, Nadja Klein, and Martin Herold. Weedsgalore: A multispectral and multitemporal uav-based dataset for crop and weed segmentation in agricultural maize fields. In Pro-ceedings of the Winter Conference on Applications of Com-puter Vision (WACV) , pages 4767–4777, 2025. 5, 21 [9] Raphael Chan, Krzysztof Lis, Sebastian Uhlemeyer, Her-mann Blum, Sina Honari, Roland Siegwart, Pascal Fua, Mathieu Salzmann, and Matthias Rottmann. Segmentmeify-oucan: A benchmark for anomaly segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14812 , 2021. 3 [10] Robin Chan, Matthias Rottmann, and Hanno Gottschalk. Pixel-wise anomaly detection in complex driving scenes. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. 3 [11] Hugh Chen, Scott M. Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Checkpoint ensembles: Ensemble methods from a single training pro-cess. CoRR , abs/1710.03282, 2017. 15 [12] Liang-Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 801–818, 2018. 21 [13] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016. 5, 20 [14] Claudia Czado and Thomas Nagler. Vine copula based mod-eling. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 9(1): 453–477, 2022. 27 [15] Jesse Davis and Mark Goadrich. The relationship between precision-recall and roc curves. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning , pages 233– 240, 2006. 6 

9[16] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the em algorithm. Jour-nal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodologi-cal) , 39(1):1–22, 1977. 4, 23 [17] Taylor Denouden, Rick Salay, Krzysztof Czarnecki, Vahdat Abdelzad, Buu Phan, and Sachin Vernekar. Improving recon-struction autoencoder out-of-distribution detection with ma-halanobis distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02765 , 2018. 3[18] A. Foucart, O. Debeir, and C. Decaestecker. Panoptic quality should be avoided as a metric for assessing cell nuclei seg-mentation and classification in digital pathology. Scientific Reports , 13:8614, 2023. 19 [19] Jannik Franzen, Claudia Winklmayr, Vanessa E Guarino, Christoph Karg, Xiaoyan Yu, Nora Koreuber, Jan P Albrecht, Philip Bischoff, and Dagmar Kainmueller. Arctique: An arti-ficial histopathological dataset unifying realism and control-lability for uncertainty quantification. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37, 2024. 5, 19 [20] M´ elanie Gaillochet, Christian Desrosiers, and Herv´ e Lom-baert. Active learning for medical image segmentation with stochastic batches. Medical Image Analysis , 90:102958, 2023. 1 [21] Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning ,pages 1050–1059. PMLR, 2016. 3, 4, 15 [22] Jakob Gawlikowski, Cedrique Rovile Njieutcheu Tassi, Mohsin Ali, Jongseok Lee, Matthias Humt, Jianxiang Feng, Anna Kruspe, Rudolph Triebel, Peter Jung, Ribana Roscher, et al. A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks. Arti-ficial Intelligence Review , 56(Suppl 1):1513–1589, 2023. 3 [23] Robert C Geary. The contiguity ratio and statistical mapping. 

The incorporated statistician , 5(3):115–146, 1954. 15 [24] Yarin Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. Selective classification for deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. 3, 22 [25] Yonatan Geifman, Guy Uziel, and Ran El-Yaniv. Bias-reduced uncertainty estimation for deep neural classifiers. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2019. 1, 6, 7, 22 [26] Simon Graham, Mostafa Jahanifar, Ayesha Azam, Mo-hammed Nimir, Yee-Wah Tsang, Katherine Dodd, Emily Hero, Harvir Sahota, Atisha Tank, Ksenija Benes, et al. Lizard: a large-scale dataset for colonic nuclear instance segmentation and classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 684–693, 2021. 5, 19 [27] Matthew C Hancock and Jerry F Magnan. Lung nodule ma-lignancy classification using only radiologist-quantified im-age features as inputs to statistical learning algorithms: prob-ing the lung image database consortium dataset with two sta-tistical learning methods. Journal of Medical Imaging , 3(4): 044504–044504, 2016. 19 [28] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A baseline for detect-ing misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2017. 3, 6, 15 [29] Lang Huang, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Self-adaptive training: Beyond empirical risk mini-mization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 33 , 2020. 3 [30] Paul F. Jaeger, Carsten T. L¨ uth, Lukas Klein, and Till J. Bungert. A call to reflect on evaluation practices for failure detection in image classification, 2023. 7, 22 [31] Kim-Celine Kahl, Carsten T L¨ uth, Maximilian Zenk, Klaus Maier-Hein, and Paul F Jaeger. Values: A framework for systematic validation of uncertainty estimation in semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08501 , 2024. 1, 3, 5, 7, 19, 20, 21 [32] Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 1, 3, 4 [33] Simon Kohl, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Clemens Meyer, Jeffrey De Fauw, Joseph R Ledsam, Klaus Maier-Hein, SM Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Olaf Ronneberger. A probabilistic u-net for segmentation of ambiguous im-ages. Advances in neural information processing systems ,31, 2018. 1 [34] Timo Kohlberger, Vivek Singh, Chris Alvino, Claus Bahlmann, and Leo Grady. Evaluating segmentation error without ground truth. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2012 , pages 528– 536. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. 3 [35] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estima-tion using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 3, 4, 15 [36] Benjamin Lambert, Florence Forbes, Senan Doyle, Har-monie Dehaene, and Michel Dojat. Trustworthy clinical ai solutions: a unified review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning models for medical image analysis. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , page 102830, 2024. 1 [37] Kimin Lee, Kibok Lee, Honglak Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. A simple unified framework for detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 31, 2018. 3 [38] Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Doll´ ar. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2980–2988, 2017. 19 [39] Weitang Liu, Xiaoyun Wang, John Owens, and Yixuan Li. Energy-based out-of-distribution detection. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:21464–21475, 2020. 26 [40] Vebjorn Ljosa, Katherine L Sokolnicki, and Anne E Carpen-ter. Annotated high-throughput microscopy image sets for validation. Nature methods , 9(7):637, 2012. 5, 20 [41] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems 30 , pages 4765–4774. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. 6, 25 [42] Zihao Luo, Xiangde Luo, Zijun Gao, and Guotai Wang. An uncertainty-guided tiered self-training framework for ac-tive source-free domain adaptation in prostate segmentation, 2024. 3 

10 [43] Gregory P Meyer and Niranjan Thakurdesai. Learning an uncertainty-aware object detector for autonomous driv-ing. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 10521–10527. IEEE, 2020. 1 [44] Sudhanshu Mittal, Joshua Niemeijer, ¨ Ozg¨ un C ¸ ic ¸ek, Maxim Tatarchenko, Jan Ehrhardt, J¨ org P. Sch¨ afer, Heinz Handels, and Thomas Brox. Realistic evaluation of deep active learn-ing for image classification and semantic segmentation. In-ternational Journal of Computer Vision , 2025. 1 [45] Nataliia Molchanova, Vatsal Raina, Andrey Malinin, Francesco La Rosa, Henning Muller, Mark Gales, Cristina Granziera, Mara Graziani, and Meritxell Bach Cuadra. Novel structural-scale uncertainty measures and error re-tention curves: Application to multiple sclerosis. In 2023 IEEE 20th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , pages 1–5, 2023. 3 [46] Miguel Monteiro, Lo¨ ıc Le Folgoc, Daniel Coelho de Castro, Nick Pawlowski, Bernardo Marques, Konstantinos Kamnit-sas, Mark Van der Wilk, and Ben Glocker. Stochastic seg-mentation networks: Modelling spatially correlated aleatoric uncertainty. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 33:12756–12767, 2020. 1 [47] Percy Moran. The interpretation of statistical maps. Journal of the royal statistical society series b-methodological , 10: 243–251, 1948. 2, 4, 14 [48] Jose G. Moreno-Torres, Troy Raeder, Roc´ ıo Alaiz-Rodr´ ıguez, Nitesh V. Chawla, and Francisco Herrera. A uni-fying view on dataset shift in classification. Pattern Recog-nition , 45(1):521–530, 2012. 5 [49] Nikita Moshkov, Botond Mathe, Attila Kertesz-Farkas, Reka Hollandi, and Peter Horvath. Test-time augmentation for deep learning-based cell segmentation on microscopy im-ages. Scientific Reports , 10(1):5068, 2020. 4, 15 [50] Jishnu Mukhoti and Yarin Gal. Evaluating bayesian deep learning methods for semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12709 , 2018. 3, 26 [51] Jishnu Mukhoti, Andreas Kirsch, Joost van Amersfoort, Philip H.S. Torr, and Yarin Gal. Deep deterministic un-certainty: A new simple baseline. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 24384–24394, 2023. 3, 26 [52] Tanya Nair, Doina Precup, Douglas L. Arnold, and Tal Ar-bel. Exploring uncertainty measures in deep networks for multiple sclerosis lesion detection and segmentation. Medi-cal Image Analysis , 59:101557, 2020. 3 [53] Kazuki Osawa, Siddharth Swaroop, Anirudh Jain, Runa Es-chenhagen, Richard E. Turner, Rio Yokota, and Moham-mad Emtiyaz Khan. Practical deep learning with bayesian principles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019. 3 [54] Firat Ozdemir, Zixuan Peng, Philipp Fuernstahl, Christine Tanner, and Orcun Goksel. Active learning for segmenta-tion based on bayesian sample queries. Knowledge-Based Systems , 214:106531, 2021. 1 [55] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An im-perative style, high-performance deep learning library. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. 21 [56] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12:2825–2830, 2011. 21 [57] Osvaldo Pereira, Esley Torres, Yasel Garc´ es Su´ arez, and Roberto Rodr´ ıguez. Edge detection based on kernel density estimation. ArXiv , abs/1411.1297, 2014. 2, 4, 14 [58] Milda Poceviˇ ci¯ ut˙ e, Gabriel Eilertsen, and Claes Lundstr¨ om. Benefits of spatial uncertainty aggregation for segmentation in digital pathology. Journal of Medical Imaging , 11(1): 017501–017501, 2024. 2, 3 [59] Janis Postels, Mattia Seg` u, Tao Sun, Luc Van Gool, Fisher Yu, and Federico Tombari. On the practicality of determin-istic epistemic uncertainty. CoRR , abs/2107.00649, 2021. 3 [60] Sai Prasanna, Daniel Honerkamp, Kshitij Sirohi, Tim Welschehold, Wolfram Burgard, and Abhinav Val-ada. Perception matters: Enhancing embodied ai with uncertainty-aware semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02297 , 2024. 2 [61] Stephan Rabanser, Anvith Thudi, Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, and Nicolas Papernot. Training private models that know what they don’t know. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 36 , New Orleans, LA, USA, 2023. 3 [62] Stephan R. Richter, Vibhav Vineet, Stefan Roth, and Vladlen Koltun. Playing for data: Ground truth from computer games. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 102–118. Springer International Publishing, 2016. 5, 20 [63] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmen-tation. In International Conference on Medical image com-puting and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. 19 [64] Josef Lorenz Rumberger, Elias Baumann, Peter Hirsch, An-drew Janowczyk, Inti Zlobec, and Dagmar Kainmueller. Panoptic segmentation with highly imbalanced semantic la-bels. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Challenges (ISBIC) , pages 1–4. IEEE, 2022. 19 [65] Sari Sabban, Abdullah Alotebi, Zainab Khalifah, and Tarik Alafif. SinfNet: Microorganism image classifier, 2023. 5, 20 [66] Gideon Schwarz. Estimating the dimension of a model. The annals of statistics , pages 461–464, 1978. 4, 23 [67] Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of commu-nication. The Bell System Technical Journal , 27:379–423, 1948. 2, 4, 14 [68] Daniel Steininger, Andreas Trondl, Gerardus Croonen, Julia Simon, and Verena Widhalm. The cropandweed dataset: A multi-modal learning approach for efficient crop and weed manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Con-ference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 3729– 3738, 2023. 5, 21 

11 [69] Yiyou Sun, Yifei Ming, Xiaojin Zhu, and Yixuan Li. Out-of-distribution detection with deep nearest neighbors. In 

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning (ICML) , pages 20827–20840. PMLR, 2022. 3[70] Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Car-lini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt. Measuring ro-bustness to natural distribution shifts in image classifica-tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,33:18583–18599, 2020. 26 [71] Jeremias Traub, Till J. Bungert, Carsten T. L¨ uth, Michael Baumgartner, Klaus H. Maier-Hein, Lena Maier-Hein, and Paul F. J¨ ager. Overcoming common flaws in the evaluation of selective classification systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2323–2347. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 3 [72] John W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1977. 6, 24 [73] Amaan Valiuddin, Ruud Van Sloun, Christiaan Viviers, Pe-ter H.N. de With, and Fons van der Sommen. A review of bayesian uncertainty quantification in deep probabilistic im-age segmentation. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-search , 2025. 2, 3 [74] Guotai Wang, Michael Aertsen, Jan Deprest, S´ ebastien Ourselin, Tom Vercauteren, and Shaoting Zhang. 

Uncertainty-Guided Efficient Interactive Refinement of Fetal Brain Segmentation from Stacks of MRI Slices , page 279–288. Springer International Publishing, 2020. 3 [75] Jingdong Wang, Ke Sun, Tianheng Cheng, Borui Jiang, Chaorui Deng, Yang Zhao, Dong Liu, Yadong Mu, Mingkui Tan, Xinggang Wang, et al. Deep high-resolution repre-sentation learning for visual recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 43(10):3349– 3364, 2020. 19, 21 [76] Rui Wang, Tengkun Yang, Ci Liang, Mengying Wang, and Yusheng Ci. Reliable autonomous driving environment per-ception: Uncertainty quantification of semantic segmenta-tion. Journal of Transportation Engineering, Part A: Sys-tems , 151(3):04024117, 2025. 1 [77] Shuo Wang, Giacomo Tarroni, Chen Qin, Yuanhan Mo, Chengliang Dai, Chen Chen, Ben Glocker, Yike Guo, Daniel Rueckert, and Wenjia Bai. Deep generative model-based quality control for cardiac mri segmentation. In Medical Im-age Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MIC-CAI 2020 , pages 88–97, 2020. 3 [78] Frank Wilcoxon. Individual comparisons by ranking meth-ods. Biometrics bulletin , 1(6):80–83, 1945. 6, 15 [79] Sanghyun Woo, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, In So Kweon, and Saining Xie. Con-vnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16133–16142, 2023. 19 [80] Yingda Xia, Yi Zhang, Fengze Liu, Wei Shen, and Alan L. Yuille. Synthesize then compare: Detecting failures and anomalies for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. 3 [81] Lin Yang, Yizhe Zhang, Jianxu Chen, Siyuan Zhang, and Danny Z. Chen. Suggestive annotation: A deep active learn-ing framework for biomedical image segmentation. CoRR ,abs/1706.04737, 2017. 1, 3 [82] Maximilian Zenk, David Zimmerer, Fabian Isensee, Jeremias Traub, Tobias Norajitra, Paul F J¨ ager, and Klaus Maier-Hein. Comparative benchmarking of failure detec-tion methods in medical image segmentation: unveiling the role of confidence aggregation. Medical image analysis , 101: 103392, 2025. 1, 3 

12 Supplementary Material 

A. Formal properties of intensity-based aggre-gation strategies 

In this section we give formal definitions of relevant prop-erties of intensity-based AggSs. The properties Monotonic-ity and Proportion invariance have already been mentioned in the main text where we showed how they impact down-stream performance. Here, we additionally discuss Param-eter independence and Locality .When an intesity-based AggS exhibits a given property, we provide a formal proof or justification. Conversely, if an AggS does not satisfy a property, we present a coun-terexample. The counterexamples are derived from experi-ments on simplified toy datasets—designed to be idealized test cases. If an AggS fails under these conditions, it is likely to be even more unreliable in real-world applications. 

PF M PI L

Global Average (AVG) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗

Above-Threshold Average (ATA) ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗

Above-Quantile Average (AQA) ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗

Patch-Level Maximum (PLM) ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓

Weighted Class Average (WCA) ✗ ✓ ✗∗ ✗  

> Table A.1. Overview of key properties of selected AggSs. PF: Parameter-free, M: Monotonic, PI: Proportion invariant, L: Local.
> ∗WCA becomes proportion invariant when the background class is excluded in specific use cases where foreground classes exhibit high uncertainty and the background class has low uncertainty.

A.1. Parameter-fee property 

AVG clearly is parameter-free. ATA depends on the fixed threshold T > 0 and is only applicable if T is less than the pixelwise maximum of the heatmap U .AQA depends on the fixed portion q ∈ (0 , 1) of lower un-certainty values above which all uncertainties are averaged. PLM depends on the choice of patch size. While too small patch sizes are prone to outliers ( e.g . for a 1 × 1 patch size PLM is equivalent to the pixelwise maximum), too large patch sizes approximate AVG and thus might return lower averages than expected. Weighted Class Average (WCA) technically depends on the choice of weights wc for the classes. However, the most important examples Single-Class Average (SCA), Balanced Class Average (BCA) and Imbalanced Class Average (ICA) are parameter-free since the choice of weights is fixed. 

A.2. Monotonicity 

We call an AggS monotonic if an increase in all pixelwise uncertainty scores leads to an increase in the aggregated           

> Figure A.1. Non-monotonicity of ATA. Left is shown a 3×3
> uncertainty map. If we increase each pixel value by ∆the ATA score (threshold T= 0 .7) will drop at a value of ∆ = 0 .1, since the amount of pixels affecting the average suddenly increases as their values pass the threshold.

score. More formally, AggS f is monotonic if and only if f (U ) ≤ f (V ) for any uncertainty maps U, V satisfying 

ui ≤ vi for each pixel i = 1 , . . . , mn .This property ensures that the aggregated scores reliably and intuitively track increases in pixelwise uncertainty. Suppose, e.g . that an OoD sample would lead to a slight in-crease in uncertainty distributed equally across all pixels of the uncertainty map. A non-monotonic AggS might assign similar aggregated scores to both the iD and the OoD sam-ple making them impossible to distinguish despite a clear difference in pixelwise uncertainty. AVG is monotonic since if we have two uncertainty maps 

U, V of shape m × n satisfying ui ≤ vi for all pixels i =1, . . . , mn then for the AVG holds AVG (U ) = 1

mn 

X

> i

ui ≤ 1

mn 

X

> i

vi = AVG (V ) (1) This implies that PLM is also monotonic, since it computes the average w.r.t. to patches of fixed size. To prove that AQA is monotonic, consider the lists of pix-elwise uncertainty values of U resp. V sorted ascendingly :

u1 ≤ · · · ≤ umn resp. v1 ≤ · · · ≤ vmn . Our assump-tion that each pixelwise value of V is increased compared to U implies that for both lists we have ui ≤ vi for all 

i = 1 , . . . , mn . Therefore, the q-quantile w.r.t. the values of V must be greater or equal to the q-quantile w.r.t. U . Fur-thermore, since both lists have the same number of uncer-tainty values lying above the q-quantile the average of those values for V will be greater or equal to the average for U .For each choice of class weights wc the WCA is monotonic as well: If ui ≥ vi for all pixels i for uncertainty maps 

U, V , then in particular for the class-wise average we have 

αUc ≥ αVc for each class c. For a fixed choice of weights wc

13 this implies WCA (U ) = X

> c

wcαUc ≥= X

> c

wcαVc = WCA (V ) (2) In contrast, ATA is not monotonic, a counterexample is il-lustrated in Fig. 1b and Fig. A.1. 

A.3. Proportion invariance 

Consider idealized binary uncertainty maps having only low-uncertainty regions with uncertainty values approxi-mately 0 (e.g . irrelevant background) and high-uncertainty regions with uncertainty values approximately 1 (e.g . rele-vant foreground). An AggS f is proportion invariant if f (U ) = f (V ) for any such uncertainty maps U, V only differing by the area pro-portions of the low- resp. high-uncertainty regions. A situa-tion where this property would be desirable is the cropping of uncertainty maps: in this case we might want the ag-gregated uncertainty score to be unaffected when irrelevant low-uncertainty regions in the background are removed. By this definition AVG is highly dependent on the present area-proportion, as it divides the sum over all pixelwise un-certainty by the total number of pixels. AQA also depends on the proportion of low-uncertainty pixels as it considers the q highest uncertainty values in 

U If the proportion of high-uncertainty values drops below 

q, the selection of the top q values will inevitably include low-uncertainty pixels, resulting in a lower score. This ef-fect is illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), where the presence of low-uncertainty pixels influences the final aggregation outcome. In contrast, PLM only depends on the uncertainty values within the maximal patch. Increasing or decreasing low-uncertainty proportion does not affect this patch and thus PLM remains unaffected. Similarly, ATA only depends on high uncertainty values. In-creasing or decreasing low-uncertainty proportion does not affect this set of high values (assuming that the threshold T

is chosen sufficiently high to not capture low background uncertainty). As a result, ATA is proportion invariant. The WCA is generally not proportion invariant, as changes in class proportions influence individual class averages, thereby affecting the overall weighted sum. However, in scenarios where high uncertainty is typically concentrated in foreground classes and low uncertainty is prevalent in the background the BCA and ICA remain proportion invariant in these settings, as they are unaffected by background pro-portion changes. 

A.4. Locality 

AVG is non-local as it is computed across all pixels. Simi-larly, ATA and AQA are non-local AggSs since the relevant uncertainty values above threshold T or q-quantile may oc-cur at pixels across the whole image In contrast, PLM is                      

> Figure B.1. Spatial decomposition using Moran’s I. For an un-certainty map Uwe compute the pixelwise local spatial measure w.r.t. to Moran’s I which captures noise ( I= 0 ) and clusters (I= 1 ). The local spatial measures can be interpreted as weights of a weight matrix Wwhere high weights correspond to high spa-tial auto-correlation. The pixelwise product of Uand Wis Uhigh
> while the pixelwise product of Uand 1−Wis Ulow , which yields a matrix decomposition of the original uncertainty map.

local as its resulting score only depends on the uncertainty values of pixels within the maximal patch. The WCA is generally not a local aggregation strategy, as it computes a weighted sum of class-wise uncertainty aver-ages across all classes. Consequently, if all class weights are nonzero, every pixel in U contributes to the final score, making it inherently global rather than local. However, in the specific case of the SCA applied to a class that is a pri-ori known to have spatially localized instances—meaning it occupies only a small proportion of the image—SCA can indeed exhibit local behavior. 

Applicability to spatial measures We do not apply these properties to spatial measures because their values reflect local structural patterns in uncertainty maps and should not directly be compared to uncertainty intensities. Conse-quently, properties like monotonicity are irrelevant for spa-tial aggregators, as the increase of spatial measures is not always related to an increase of uncertainty. For instance, a global pixelwise increase of uncertainty can potentially de-crease the entropy across an uncertainty map, in particular if the uncertainty values after the increase all lie within the same bin. 

B. Details on spatial aggregation strategies 

B.1. Selection of spatial measures 

For our experiments, we use the following spatial measures: Moran’s I [47], Edge Density Score [57], and Shannon En-tropy [67]. 

Moran’s I It measures spatial autocorrelation by compar-ing the similarity of values at neighboring pixels. A high positive value indicates that similar uncertainty values clus-ter together, while a value near zero implies spatial random-ness. In its original form, Moran’s I ranges from −1 (nega-tive correlation) to 1 (positive correlation). For our analysis 14 we adapt Moran’s I by capping negative values at 0, as neg-ative spatial correlation ( e.g . checkerboard patterns) is not to be expected in our data. 

Edge Density Score It quantifies the presence of edges by computing the proportion of pixels within a local window whose gradient magnitude exceeds a specified threshold. It reflects how much spatial variation ( e.g . sharp transitions or boundaries) is present in the uncertainty map. 

Shannon Entropy It measures the local variability of uncertainty values by computing the Shannon entropy over discretized uncertainty levels within a local window. Higher entropy indicates more heterogeneous or noisy un-certainty, while lower values correspond to more uniform regions. Both the Edge Density Score and entropy involve additional hyperparameters. The Edge Density Score uses a gradient threshold τ to classify pixels as edge-like; we set τ = 0 .2.Entropy is computed using b = 4 bins to discretize local un-certainty values. Another viable spatial measure is Geary’s C [23], which captures local dissimilarity, with values close to 1 indicating randomness, below 1 indicating positive au-tocorrelation, and above 1 indicating negative autocorrela-tion. However, we omit it, as it provides information similar to Moran’s I. 

B.2. Spatial mass ratio 

Given an uncertainty map U and a spatial measure with val-ues between 0 and 1, we propose to calculate a Spatial Mass Ratio (SMR) which reflects how much of the total uncer-tainty is concentrated in spatially structured regions of the image. For each pixel u of the (1-padded) uncertainty map U we first compute the pixelwise local spatial measure wu within a sliding window of size 3 × 3 centered at u. The resulting matrix W ∈ [0 , 1] m×n contains the local spatial measures for all pixels ui ∈ U .Using W we then compute a filtered uncertainty map U high 

by pixelwise multiplying U with W , retaining only the un-certainty mass in regions of high local spatial measure. Sim-ilarly, multiplying U with 1 − W yields U low , capturing the mass in regions of low local spatial measure. This results in a spatial decomposition of the uncertainty (see Figure B.1): 

U = U high + U low .

Finally, we define the Spatial Mass Ratio (SMR) as the por-tion of uncertainty mass located in pixels with high spatial measure: SMR := 

Pnm i uiwi

Pnm i ui

∈ [0 , 1] .

The behavior of the SMR can be intuitively understood by considering its extreme cases: For Moran’s I, an SMR of 0 indicates that all uncertainty is located in noise-like, un-correlated regions, while a value of 1 reflects fully clustered uncertainty. For Edge Density Score, SMR equals 0 when uncertainty lies entirely in flat areas and reaches 1 when it is concentrated along edges. For Entropy, an SMR of 0 means local uncertainty values fall within a single bin (i.e., low variability), whereas a value of 1 corresponds to a uniform distribution across bins, indicating high local randomness. 

C. Details on Benchmarking Results 

Table C.1 provides a more detailed analysis of the re-sults shown in Figures 3 and 5b, reporting mean scores and standard deviations computed over 500 bootstrap sam-ples of the evaluation data. This approach reduces the risk that observed performance is driven by sample vari-ability in the test sets. As expected, standard deviations are larger when fewer evaluation samples are available (cf. Supp. D.7); however, the relative ranking of AggSs remains stable across datasets. To assess the statistical significance of performance differ-ences, we conducted a one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test [78] on the AUROC and E-AURC scores obtained from the bootstrapped samples across the 10 datasets. The null hypothesis ( H0) assumes that aggregator fA does not out-perform fB , while the alternative hypothesis ( H1) asserts that fA performs significantly better (i.e., higher AUROC or lower E-AURC), with a significance level of α = 0 .05 .Full p-value matrices are omitted here for clarity but are available for AggSs on MCD heatmaps at https:// github.com/Kainmueller- Lab/aggrigator_ experiments .To substantiate our claim that the variability in the perfor-mance of different AggSs arises from the task and dataset properties rather than the UQ methods used to generate the pixelwise uncertainties we have reproduced our main benchmarking results for additional UQ methods beyond Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD, [21]): Test Time Augmen-tation (TTA, [49]), Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP, [28]) and two ensembling approaches: Deep Ensembles (DE, [35], for CAR-CS, LIDC-Mal, and LIDC-Tex) and the computationally lighter Checkpoint Ensemble (CE, [11] for ARC-BC and ARC-Nuc.) TTA selects augmentations at test time that best suit each dataset, avoiding to affect the model’s predictive capacity and improving its ability to generalize. Tables C.3 and C.4 follow the same statistical protocol as Table C.1. Con-sistent with previous observations, standard deviations in-crease when fewer evaluation samples are available. Addi-tionally, GMM-All and its ablated variants exhibit reduced performance on MSP heatmaps of LIZ-SG and LIZ-IG, sug-gesting that the underlying data modes are insufficiently 15 a AUROC BCA .72 ± .06 .79 ± .05 .89 ± .01 .57 ± .05 .82 ± .07 .68 ± .02 .68 ± .02 .58 ± .06 .77 ± .06 .95 ± .02 5.2 GMM-All .84 ± .05 .87 ± .05 1.00 ± .00 .86 ± .03 .77 ± .05 .45 ± .03 .44 ± .03 .95 ± .03 1.00 ± .00 1.00 ± .00 5.2 ICA .60 ± .07 .83 ± .05 .84 ± .02 .57 ± .05 .82 ± .07 .71 ± .02 .59 ± .03 .57 ± .06 .77 ± .06 .95 ± .02 5.9 GMM-Int .79 ± .06 .83 ± .06 .73 ± .02 .86 ± .03 .78 ± .05 .49 ± .03 .43 ± .03 .91 ± .04 .98 ± .01 1.00 ± .00 6.0 QFR .62 ± .07 .86 ± .04 .62 ± .02 .54 ± .05 .89 ± .05 .68 ± .03 .57 ± .03 .58 ± .06 .67 ± .06 .91 ± .03 6.6 GMM-Spa .93 ± .03 .66 ± .07 1.00 ± .00 .67 ± .04 .72 ± .07 .49 ± .03 .41 ± .03 .85 ± .05 .89 ± .04 .90 ± .03 7.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> PLM 50 .48 ±.08 .68 ±.07 .46 ±.02 .95 ±.02 .50 ±.07 .68 ±.02 .75 ±.02 .57 ±.05 .49 ±.07 .86 ±.04 8.7 AQA 0.60 .53 ±.07 .64 ±.07 .64 ±.02 .95 ±.02 .50 ±.08 .76 ±.02 .81 ±.02 .33 ±.05 .49 ±.07 .55 ±.05 8.9 PLM 10 .52 ±.08 .64 ±.07 .44 ±.03 .91 ±.03 .59 ±.09 .65 ±.02 .65 ±.03 .49 ±.04 .69 ±.06 .86 ±.04 9.1 PLM 20 .47 ±.08 .68 ±.07 .42 ±.03 .96 ±.02 .52 ±.08 .67 ±.02 .73 ±.02 .56 ±.04 .57 ±.07 .84 ±.04 9.2 AQA.75 .52 ±.07 .64 ±.07 .60 ±.02 .96 ±.02 .50 ±.08 .77 ±.02 .82 ±.02 .33 ±.05 .46 ±.07 .55 ±.05 9.7 AVG .50 ±.07 .64 ±.07 .74 ±.02 .95 ±.02 .50 ±.08 .77 ±.02 .79 ±.02 .33 ±.06 .48 ±.07 .56 ±.05 9.8 AQA .9 .54 ±.07 .69 ±.07 .46 ±.03 .96 ±.02 .50 ±.08 .75 ±.02 .77 ±.02 .32 ±.05 .43 ±.07 .54 ±.05 9.9 ATA .5 .66 ±.07 .78 ±.06 .32 ±.02 .47 ±.05 .45 ±.07 .61 ±.03 .59 ±.03 .43 ±.05 .54 ±.07 .63 ±.05 11.1 ATA .3 .53 ±.07 .61 ±.07 .35 ±.02 .42 ±.05 .54 ±.07 .67 ±.02 .58 ±.03 .42 ±.04 .58 ±.06 .67 ±.05 11.5 ATA .7 .48 ±.08 .79 ±.06 .36 ±.02 .51 ±.06 .51 ±.07 .56 ±.03 .51 ±.03 .35 ±.04 .48 ±.07 .58 ±.05 12.0
> bE-AURC QFR .04 ±.01 .02 ±.00 .06 ±.01 .05 ±.01 .09 ±.04 .26 ±.01 .27 ±.01 .16 ±.02 .04 ±.01 .04 ±.01 3.4 GMM-All .05 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .05 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .16 ±.01 .21 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .06 ±.01 4.2 GMM-Int .06 ±.01 .03 ±.01 .10 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .17 ±.01 .20 ±.01 .09 ±.02 .09 ±.01 .06 ±.01 5.4 GMM-Spa .05 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .05 ±.00 .08 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .18 ±.01 .20 ±.01 .12 ±.02 .13 ±.03 .07 ±.01 6.0 BCA .04 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .04 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .13 ±.04 .30 ±.01 .33 ±.01 .20 ±.02 .10 ±.03 .09 ±.01 6.7
> ATA .3 .05 ±.01 .03 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .12 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .27 ±.01 .28 ±.01 .28 ±.02 .03 ±.01 .09 ±.01 8.0 ATA .5 .04 ±.01 .02 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .19 ±.04 .15 ±.04 .23 ±.01 .28 ±.01 .29 ±.02 .03 ±.01 .08 ±.01 8.1 PLM 10 .06 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .09 ±.01 .09 ±.03 .13 ±.04 .27 ±.01 .30 ±.01 .30 ±.02 .11 ±.04 .05 ±.01 8.3 PLM 20 .06 ±.01 .02 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .28 ±.01 .33 ±.01 .29 ±.02 .09 ±.03 .06 ±.01 8.5 ATA .7 .13 ±.02 .02 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .20 ±.04 .15 ±.04 .21 ±.01 .25 ±.01 .30 ±.02 .04 ±.01 .08 ±.01 9.4 PLM 50 .08 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .09 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .28 ±.01 .34 ±.01 .29 ±.02 .09 ±.03 .07 ±.01 10.0 AQA .9 .05 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .08 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .31 ±.01 .35 ±.01 .32 ±.03 .08 ±.02 .13 ±.02 10.5 ICA .09 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .13 ±.04 .33 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .31 ±.03 .10 ±.03 .09 ±.01 10.7 AQA .75 .06 ±.01 .03 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .32 ±.01 .37 ±.01 .31 ±.03 .09 ±.03 .13 ±.02 11.6 AVG .09 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .32 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .31 ±.03 .09 ±.03 .12 ±.01 11.9 AQA .6 .07 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .10 ±.03 .14 ±.04 .32 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .31 ±.03 .09 ±.03 .13 ±.01 12.0 ARC-BC ARC-Nuc CAR-CS LIDC-Mal LIDC-Tex LIZ-IG LIZ-SG WEED-Hand WORM-Nem WORM-Pro

Table C.1. Performance of AggSs on uncertainty maps gen-erated with MC Dropout (MCD) in OoD and failure detec-tion. Columns are color-coded with a red-to-green gradient, where white represents the mean (for AUROC this is equivalent to ran-dom guessing). (a) Higher AUROC values (greener cells, 0.6–1.0) indicate better iD vs. OoD separation, while (b) lower E-AURC values (greener) indicate better alignment between uncertainty es-timates and prediction errors. AggSs are ranked from best (top) to worst (bottom) based on their average metric, first computed across 500 bootstrap samples per dataset, and then averaged across datasets to ensure stable rankings (rightmost column). Each value is reported with the standard deviation across bootstrap samples. These tables complement Figures 3 and 5b. 

separable in high-dimensional feature space. While CE, DE, and TTA are available only for a subset of datasets, MSP provides a comprehensive overview that allows fair comparison with MCD. Table C.2 shows that even when the uncertainty estimate is heuristic (as in MSP, which relies solely on softmax scores and thus cannot cap-ture OoD uncertainty), the relative performance of AggSs remains largely consistent with that observed under MCD. This suggests, at least empirically, that best practices for ag-gregation are better identified by evaluating AggSs across diverse datasets rather than across uncertainty methods. 

C.1. On the AggSs performance in OoD Detection 

As shown in Table C.2a, the top performers, based on their average rank, are the prediction-based aggregators, as well as the GMM-All , GMM-Int and GMM-Spa applied to MSP uncertainty maps. The conclusions drawn in Section 4.3 remain consistent, with the notable exception of the de-fault aggregation strategy AVG: its mean rank improves from 12th to 7th due to stronger performance on ARC-BC, ARC-Nuc, WEED-Pro, and WEED-Nem. This behavior is largely driven by the synthetic nature of the ARC datasets, where MSP is more sensitive to induced and controlled noise, and by the label shift present in the WEED OoD variants, which likely reduces model confidence. In LIDC-Tex, MSP fails to detect OoD instances: the increased trans-parency of tumors should create elevated uncertainty along borders within the predicted masks, but the overconfident MSP does not capture this, leading to missed detections (with a consequent increase in E-AURC; cf. Table C.2b). When the analysis is repeated for CE and DE, as reported in Table C.3a, the ranking aligns closely with that observed for MCD, reflecting the greater suitability of these tech-niques for capturing epistemic uncertainty. Results for TTA are available only for a smaller subset of datasets (cf. Ta-ble C.4a); therefore, it is not possible to determine whether uncertainty increases in OoD samples extend to the extreme tail of the uncertainty distribution, potentially affecting the performance of AQA 0.90. Nonetheless, we continue to ob-serve the dominance of prediction-based aggregators and the GMM-All AggS, while GMM-Spa performs poorly in scenarios where spatial augmentations produce similar un-certainty maps for both iD and OoD samples. This is ex-pected, for instance, in the three-label task learned on ARC-Nuc, where removing nuclei intensity leads to fragmented border predictions; for both iD and OoD samples, the result-ing uncertainty structure resembles the effects of rotations or crops. Across UQ methods, the p-value matrices show that no sin-gle aggregator consistently dominates in AUROC, support-ing our hypothesis that dataset-specific factors ( e.g . object count, class imbalance) strongly affect the choice of AggS and no universally optimal method can be determined. In-stead, a statistically significant top tier emerges: the GMM -based strategies and the weighted averaging approaches (BCA, ICA) significantly outperform all others ( p < 0.05 ), although no method within this group is uniformly supe-rior. While GMM-All often leads, its advantage over BCA or other GMM variants is not always significant. Lower-tier methods, such as threshold-based approaches (ATA, AQA), patch-based PLM, and the baseline AVG, are significantly outperformed in most comparisons, confirming their status as suboptimal choices. Extending the analysis to MSP, TTA, and CE/DE largely reinforces these conclusions. The MSP baseline mirrors 16 the MCD results, showing a clear separation ( p ≪ 0.01 )between top-tier AggSs ( GMM -based ones, BCA, ICA) and lower-tier methods. Interestingly, QFR, while domi-nant in Failure Detection, ranks lower here but still out-performs most lower-tier methods ( p < 0.05 ), and under ensemble- and TTA-based uncertainty it becomes statisti-cally indistinguishable from (or even superior to) GMM-All and BCA, suggesting that its foreground–background ratio strategy benefits from targeted augmentations and in-creased model diversity. Across MSP, TTA, and ensembles, GMM-based AggSs ( GMM-All, GMM-Int, GMM-Spa ) re-main consistently strong, rarely showing significant disad-vantages. Overall, this analysis supports our core hypoth-esis that, as a general rule, a stable top group of aggrega-tors exists (the prediction-aware strategies and the meta-aggregators family), but that the optimal choice for unex-plored cases strongly depends on the specific dataset prop-erties and OoD perturbation. 

C.2. On the AggS performance in Failure Detection 

In line with the numerical and qualitative results discussed in Section 4.4, Table C.2b shows similar trends for AggSs applied on MSP uncertainty heatmaps. The top-performing predictors remain QFR and BCA, both prediction-aware ,and GMM- meta-aggregators, while ICA continues to un-derperform due to repeated segmentation errors in small objects. Table C.3b and Table C.4b reveal no major de-viations in their restricted analysis subsets, with one excep-tion: the patch-based PLM20 ranks among the top five, ow-ing to the localized uncertainty maps from test-time aug-mentations that closely match segmentation error regions. However, given the limited subset of data analyzed for TTA heatmaps, no general conclusions can be drawn regarding the UQ method. For TTA, AggSs perform better in the three-label classifi-cation setting ( e.g . ARC-Nuc). For MSP, however, perfor-mance is also negatively impacted when uncertainty maps show increased uncertainty starting from the borders and extending within the predicted mask ( e.g . in LIDC-Tex), where the OoD variant exhibits inconsistent patterns. This demonstrates that in this case augmentations alone are in-sufficient to capture the uncertainty nuances between iD and OoD samples, while MSP tends to be overconfident in these regions. Analysis of the p-value matrices reveals that QFR emerges as the top-performing aggregator for Failure Detection, showing statistically significant improvements over all other methods ( p < 0.05 in all pairwise comparisons, with p < 0.001 in most cases). The next best group in-cludes the GMM-based scores and BCA, which consis-tently outperform intensity based aggregators but are sta-tistically indistinguishable from one another, indicating a robust, if slightly weaker, alternative to QFR. By contrast,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

> aAUROC GMM-All .81 ±.05 .85 ±.05 1.00 ±.00 .92 ±.03 .55 ±.08 .55 ±.03 .45 ±.03 .93 ±.03 .99 ±.01 1.00 ±.00 5.4 BCA .87 ±.04 .75 ±.06 .90 ±.01 .60 ±.05 .64 ±.09 .66 ±.02 .73 ±.02 .62 ±.06 .69 ±.06 .86 ±.04 5.6 ICA .83 ±.05 .78 ±.06 .80 ±.02 .61 ±.05 .64 ±.09 .70 ±.02 .66 ±.02 .61 ±.06 .68 ±.06 .86 ±.03 5.9 QFR .85 ±.05 .81 ±.06 .56 ±.02 .60 ±.05 .62 ±.08 .73 ±.02 .71 ±.02 .60 ±.06 .66 ±.06 .89 ±.03 5.9 GMM-Int .81 ±.05 .76 ±.06 .80 ±.02 .91 ±.03 .58 ±.07 .52 ±.03 .46 ±.03 .94 ±.03 .99 ±.01 1.00 ±.00 6.3 GMM-Spa .84 ±.06 .73 ±.07 1.00 ±.00 .70 ±.05 .58 ±.07 .51 ±.02 .52 ±.03 .89 ±.03 .82 ±.05 .87 ±.04 6.7
> AVG .62 ±.08 .60 ±.08 .74 ±.02 .96 ±.02 .40 ±.07 .77 ±.02 .78 ±.02 .32 ±.06 .50 ±.07 .65 ±.05 8.7 AQA .6 .68 ±.07 .60 ±.07 .60 ±.02 .96 ±.02 .40 ±.07 .77 ±.02 .77 ±.02 .33 ±.05 .47 ±.07 .63 ±.05 9.1 PLM 20 .66 ±.06 .62 ±.07 .37 ±.02 .96 ±.02 .40 ±.08 .68 ±.02 .68 ±.02 .57 ±.04 .62 ±.07 .80 ±.05 9.2 AQA .9 .72 ±.06 .61 ±.07 .44 ±.03 .96 ±.02 .41 ±.08 .76 ±.02 .79 ±.02 .31 ±.05 .42 ±.07 .60 ±.05 9.3 PLM 50 .55 ±.08 .61 ±.07 .42 ±.02 .96 ±.02 .41 ±.07 .69 ±.02 .69 ±.03 .56 ±.05 .48 ±.07 .78 ±.04 9.3 AQA .75 .67 ±.07 .61 ±.07 .56 ±.02 .95 ±.02 .41 ±.07 .77 ±.02 .78 ±.02 .32 ±.05 .45 ±.07 .62 ±.05 9.4 PLM 10 .50 ±.07 .58 ±.08 .35 ±.02 .90 ±.03 .45 ±.08 .66 ±.02 .59 ±.03 .50 ±.04 .69 ±.06 .81 ±.04 10.5 ATA .5 .88 ±.04 .82 ±.05 .31 ±.02 .50 ±.00 .50 ±.00 .52 ±.03 .63 ±.02 .46 ±.04 .43 ±.06 .35 ±.05 10.5 ATA .3 .87 ±.04 .72 ±.06 .52 ±.02 .65 ±.05 .34 ±.06 .60 ±.02 .61 ±.02 .44 ±.04 .48 ±.07 .42 ±.05 10.9 ATA .7 .56 ±.08 .50 ±.00 .28 ±.02 .50 ±.00 .50 ±.00 .50 ±.00 .64 ±.03 .39 ±.04 .50 ±.00 .50 ±.00 12.9
> bE-AURC GMM-All .06 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .05 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .10 ±.02 .19 ±.01 .21 ±.01 .12 ±.02 .08 ±.01 .04 ±.01 4.4 QFR .05 ±.01 .02 ±.00 .07 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .13 ±.04 .28 ±.01 .32 ±.01 .16 ±.02 .04 ±.01 .04 ±.01 4.5 GMM-Int .07 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .11 ±.02 .16 ±.01 .22 ±.01 .12 ±.02 .08 ±.01 .04 ±.01 5.1 BCA .05 ±.01 .02 ±.00 .03 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .14 ±.04 .26 ±.01 .35 ±.01 .23 ±.02 .07 ±.02 .07 ±.01 5.7 GMM-Spa .05 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .17 ±.01 .24 ±.01 .12 ±.02 .09 ±.02 .07 ±.01 6.1
> ATA .5 .04 ±.01 .02 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .15 ±.01 .11 ±.01 .21 ±.01 .29 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .05 ±.01 .08 ±.01 7.1 ATA .3 .04 ±.01 .03 ±.01 .10 ±.01 .11 ±.01 .15 ±.03 .24 ±.01 .30 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .03 ±.01 .08 ±.01 8.1 PLM 20 .08 ±.01 .03 ±.01 .10 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .15 ±.04 .28 ±.01 .31 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .09 ±.03 .05 ±.01 8.8 PLM 10 .12 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .15 ±.04 .27 ±.01 .29 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .10 ±.04 .05 ±.01 9.0 ICA .10 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .14 ±.04 .33 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .07 ±.02 .07 ±.01 9.6 PLM 50 .10 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .16 ±.04 .29 ±.01 .32 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .08 ±.03 .06 ±.01 10.0 AQA .6 .08 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .08 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .15 ±.04 .33 ±.01 .35 ±.01 .34 ±.02 .06 ±.02 .08 ±.01 10.7 AQA .9 .08 ±.01 .03 ±.00 .10 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .16 ±.04 .32 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .35 ±.02 .05 ±.02 .09 ±.01 10.8 AVG .10 ±.02 .04 ±.01 .06 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .15 ±.04 .33 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .33 ±.02 .06 ±.02 .08 ±.01 10.9 AQA .75 .08 ±.01 .04 ±.01 .09 ±.01 .07 ±.01 .15 ±.04 .33 ±.01 .36 ±.01 .32 ±.02 .06 ±.02 .09 ±.01 11.1 ATA .7 .10 ±.02 .05 ±.00 .11 ±.01 .15 ±.01 .11 ±.01 .17 ±.01 .29 ±.01 .35 ±.02 .11 ±.02 .09 ±.01 11.1 ARC-BC ARC-Nuc CAR-CS LIDC-Mal LIDC-Tex LIZ-IG LIZ-SG WEED-Hand WORM-Nem WORM-Pro

Table C.2. AggSs performance on uncertainty maps generated with Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) in OoD and failure detection. Color coding and metric interpretation are as detailed in Table A.1. (a)-(b) AggSs are ranked from best (top) to worst (bottom) based on their average metric, first computed across 500 bootstrap samples per dataset, and then averaged across datasets to ensure stable rankings. Each value is reported with the std. de-viation across bootstrap samples. 

threshold-based methods (ATA, AQA) and patch-based ap-proaches (PLM) exhibit significantly lower performance in most tests, while the global average (AVG) consistently ranks lowest, confirming it should not be used as a default strategy. These patterns are corroborated when examining AggSs on MSP, TTA, and ensemble-based uncertainty heatmaps. Across all three, QFR’s dominance is consistently con-firmed, with pairwise p-values frequently approaching ma-chine precision ( p ≪ 0.001 ), establishing it as the un-equivocal top-tier AggS for FD across all tested uncertainty frameworks. The second tier under MCD, consisting of 

GMM -variants and BCA, remains stable and consistently outperforms lower-tier aggregators - thresholding (AQA, ATA), patch-based (PLM), and averaging (AVG) - which are statistically inferior across nearly all datasets and tests. 17 a AUROC GMM-All .83 ± .05 .84 ± .06 .99 ± .00 .86 ± .03 .70 ± .07 4.8 QFR .90 ± .04 .81 ± .06 .67 ± .02 .77 ± .04 .88 ± .04 4.8 GMM-Spa .93 ± .03 .72 ± .06 1.00 ± .00 .83 ± .03 .70 ± .06 5.0 BCA .89 ± .04 .76 ± .06 .93 ± .01 .71 ± .04 .82 ± .06 5.2 ICA .88 ± .05 .79 ± .06 .89 ± .01 .70 ± .04 .82 ± .07 5.4 GMM-Int .79 ± .05 .76 ± .06 .79 ± .02 .89 ± .03 .68 ± .06 6.4 

AQA .9 .86 ± .05 .64 ± .07 .42 ± .03 .96 ± .01 .57 ± .07 8.6 PLM 20 .78 ± .05 .63 ± .07 .39 ± .02 .96 ± .01 .58 ± .07 8.8 AQA .75 .75 ± .06 .61 ± .07 .60 ± .02 .96 ± .01 .58 ± .07 9.0 AQA .6 .71 ± .06 .61 ± .07 .67 ± .02 .96 ± .01 .57 ± .07 9.4 PLM 50 .65 ± .08 .63 ± .07 .44 ± .02 .96 ± .01 .57 ± .07 9.8 AVG .62 ± .06 .59 ± .07 .78 ± .02 .96 ± .01 .57 ± .07 10.2 PLM 10 .66 ± .06 .58 ± .08 .38 ± .03 .93 ± .02 .65 ± .07 11.2 ATA .5 .84 ± .05 .76 ± .06 .25 ± .02 .51 ± .06 .40 ± .08 11.6 ATA .3 .87 ± .05 .62 ± .07 .30 ± .02 .60 ± .05 .55 ± .08 11.8 ATA .7 .42 ± .07 .74 ± .06 .28 ± .02 .42 ± .05 .32 ± .06 14.0 

b E-AURC QFR .04 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .04 ± .00 .04 ± .01 2.9 GMM-Spa .05 ± .01 .04 ± .01 .05 ± .00 .05 ± .01 .06 ± .01 4.4 GMM-All .05 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .06 ± .00 .07 ± .01 .06 ± .01 5.7 BCA .05 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .04 ± .00 .05 ± .01 .08 ± .01 6.4 GMM-Int .06 ± .01 .04 ± .01 .08 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .06 ± .01 7.0 

PLM 10 .10 ± .02 .02 ± .00 .09 ± .01 .05 ± .01 .07 ± .01 7.6 PLM 20 .07 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .09 ± .01 .05 ± .01 .08 ± .01 8.1 ATA .3 .04 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .10 ± .01 .12 ± .02 .12 ± .03 9.1 AQA .9 .05 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .09 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .08 ± .01 9.1 ATA .5 .05 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .11 ± .01 .16 ± .03 .17 ± .04 9.3 PLM 50 .07 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .09 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .08 ± .01 9.4 ATA .7 .14 ± .02 .01 ± .00 .10 ± .01 .23 ± .04 .18 ± .04 10.3 AQA .75 .07 ± .01 .03 ± .01 .08 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .08 ± .01 10.6 AQA .6 .08 ± .01 .04 ± .01 .08 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .08 ± .01 10.9 AVG .10 ± .02 .04 ± .01 .07 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .08 ± .01 11.3 ICA .10 ± .02 .04 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .05 ± .01 .08 ± .01 11.3 ARC-BC ARC-Nuc CAR-CS LIDC-Mal LIDC-Tex 

Table C.3. AggSs performance on ensembling heatmaps in OoD and failure detection. Color coding and metric interpre-tation are as detailed in Table A.1. (a)-(b) AggSs are ranked from best (top) to worst (bottom) based on their average metric, first computed across 500 bootstrap samples per dataset, and then av-eraged across datasets to ensure stable rankings. Each value is reported with the std. deviation across bootstrap samples. 

Collectively, these results validate the rankings reported in Figure 5b and underscore the importance of prediction-aware , structure-sensitive aggregators for effective FD. 

C.3. On the AggS performance across downstream tasks 

Mean ranks, metric values, and standard deviations reported in Table C.1, Table C.2, Table C.3 and Table C.4 im-ply that, in the absence of structural knowledge about the OoD dataset, aggregators possessing the theoretical prop-erty of proportion invariance (cf. Supp. A) and defined as 

prediction-aware can be reliably selected for both OoD De-tection and Failure Detection tasks (with the exception of ICA in FD). This conclusion also applies to our proposed 

GMM-All and its ablated variants, GMM-Spa and GMM-Int , which provide a robust alternative across datasets when 

a AUROC QFR .85 ± .05 .88 ± .04 .68 ± .04 .81 ± .07 4.5 BCA .81 ± .06 .87 ± .04 .70 ± .04 .73 ± .09 5.0 GMM-All .72 ± .07 .88 ± .05 .89 ± .03 .73 ± .05 5.0 ICA .74 ± .06 .88 ± .04 .70 ± .04 .72 ± .09 5.5 AQA .9 .81 ± .05 .74 ± .06 .95 ± .02 .51 ± .06 6.5 

PLM 20 .73 ± .06 .78 ± .06 .95 ± .02 .50 ± .07 6.8 GMM-Int .65 ± .06 .84 ± .05 .90 ± .03 .72 ± .05 7.8 AQA .75 .72 ± .06 .66 ± .07 .95 ± .02 .51 ± .07 8.8 AQA .6 .66 ± .07 .64 ± .07 .95 ± .02 .51 ± .07 9.8 PLM 10 .44 ± .07 .75 ± .06 .90 ± .03 .60 ± .08 9.8 PLM 50 .61 ± .07 .75 ± .06 .95 ± .02 .51 ± .07 9.8 GMM-Spa .69 ± .08 .60 ± .08 .78 ± .04 .68 ± .06 10.2 ATA .3 .81 ± .05 .67 ± .06 .64 ± .05 .46 ± .07 10.8 AVG .54 ± .07 .62 ± .07 .95 ± .02 .50 ± .07 11.0 ATA .5 .67 ± .07 .81 ± .05 .55 ± .05 .41 ± .06 11.8 ATA .7 .41 ± .07 .84 ± .05 .46 ± .06 .33 ± .06 13.2 

b E-AURC QFR .06 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .04 ± .01 .09 ± .04 3.3 GMM-All .07 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .07 ± .01 .06 ± .01 5.2 GMM-Spa .07 ± .01 .04 ± .01 .06 ± .01 .06 ± .01 5.8 GMM-Int .08 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .07 ± .01 .07 ± .01 6.2 PLM 20 .07 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 7.2 

BCA .05 ± .01 .04 ± .00 .05 ± .01 .11 ± .03 7.5 PLM 10 .10 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .05 ± .01 .12 ± .04 7.2 ATA .5 .05 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .12 ± .02 .14 ± .04 8.3 ATA .3 .04 ± .01 .04 ± .00 .10 ± .01 .12 ± .04 8.5 PLM 50 .08 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 8.8 AQA .9 .06 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 8.8 ATA .7 .13 ± .01 .02 ± .00 .12 ± .01 .15 ± .04 9.8 ICA .12 ± .01 .04 ± .01 .05 ± .01 .11 ± .03 11.2 AQA .6 .09 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 11.7 AQA .75 .08 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 11.7 AVG .13 ± .01 .03 ± .00 .06 ± .01 .12 ± .04 11.8 ARC-BC ARC-Nuc LIDC-Mal LIDC-Tex 

Table C.4. AggSs performance on TTA heatmaps AggSs in OoD and failure detection. Color coding and metric interpre-tation are as detailed in Table A.1. (a)-(b) AggSs are ranked from best (top) to worst (bottom) based on their average metric, first computed across 500 bootstrap samples per dataset, and then av-eraged across datasets to ensure stable rankings. Each value is reported with the std. deviation across bootstrap samples. 

a dataset- or task-specific choice is uncertain. 

D. Details on Experimental Setup 

The datasets were selected to cover a broad range of appli-cation domains for image segmentation (autonomous driv-ing, agricultural monitoring, biomedical imaging) as well as maximum diversity in terms of image structure ( e.g . num-ber, size, and shape of objects, as well as the number of semantic classes). This diversity is reflected in the distribu-tion of aggregated uncertainty scores, as illustrated in Fig-ure 2. Figure D.1 further complements the illustration of the datasets diversity by showing the distribution of aggregated scores along additional pairs of AggSs. 18 D.1. Segmentation of nuclei in pathology images 

LIZ (iD) The Lizard dataset [26] is a large-scale histopathology (H&E) dataset with annotations for instance- and semantic segmentation of cell nuclei in histopathology images of colon tissue. The dataset consists of 238 images of varying sizes, from which we extract patches of size 256 × 256 pixels. Patches from the DigestPath, TCGA, PanNuke, CRAG and CoNSeP subsets are used as iD. 

LIZ-G (OoD) Based on established baselines [6, 64], we use the GlaS subset as the OoD dataset, consisting of 61 images, where we again extract patches of size 256 × 256 pixels. We evaluate both semantic and instance segmen-tation, referring to the resulting OoD sets as LIZ-SG (se-mantic) and LIZ-IG (instance). Here, the distribution shift arises from variations in acquisition and recording condi-tions ( e.g ., lighting, temperature, and focal plane), which affect tissue appearance and increase overall object uncer-tainty. 

Segmentation We train the HoVer-NeXt (HN) model [6]. HN builds upon HoVer-Net (HRNet, [75]) by simplifying the pipeline: it replaces the binary nuclei segmentation map with a 3-class center-background (BCB) prediction and merges the instance segmentation decoders into a single branch. The semantic arm predicts class labels for each pixel, while the instance arm outputs center-point vectors and BCB maps for individual nuclei. The architecture fol-lows a U-Net [63] with a ConvNeXt-v2 encoder [79] (Tiny variant). HN is trained from scratch for 200,000 steps with a batch size of 12 using AdamW (weight decay 0.0001) and a cosine-annealing learning rate schedule (1e-4 to 1e-8). The encoders use 50% dropout; the decoder does not. Data aug-mentations include: HED color, hue/saturation/brightness, random noise, Gaussian blur, rotation, flipping, mirror-ing, zoom, scale, shear, translation, and elastic transforms. The training loss combines semantic and instance losses, summed and weighted by 0.02. The instance arm uses MSELoss for center-point vectors and cross-entropy for the BCB map, while the semantic arm employs a standard fo-cal loss [38] with γ = 2 .0. Hyperparameter search and per-formance monitoring are conducted on the validation set, optimizing micro- and macro-F1 scores rather than panop-tic quality, which has been shown to be suboptimal for histopathology data [18]. 

D.2. Synthetic Histopathological Images 

ARC (iD) The Arctique dataset [19] is a procedurally generated dataset modeled after histopathological colon tis-sue sections (inspired by the LIZ dataset), providing precise ground-truth masks for both semantic and instance segmen-tation. We use the standard training set which comprises 1,500 samples of 512 × 512 -pixel RGB images. 

ARC-Nuc/ARC-BC (OoD) Arctique includes controlled variations in targeted parameters, such as the presence of red blood cells (ARC-BC) and the intensity of nuclei stain-ing (ARC-Nuc). In the ARC-BC setting, additional red blood cells are misclassified as eosinophil cells, leading to local increases in uncertainty at the locations of the blood cells for semantic segmentation. In the ARC-Nuc setting, treduced nuclei staining intensity makes it more difficult for the model to identify individual cells, thus increasing the uncertainty at object boundaries in instance segmentation. 

Segmentation We use the same training setup as de-scribed for the LIZ dataset. 

D.3. Binary segmentation of lung nodules in CT volumes 

LIDC (iD) We use the LIDC-IDRI dataset [4], with the 

pylidc library [27], following the pre-processing strategy of Kahl et al. [31]. in Kahl et al. [31]. In particular, we use only lung nodules ≥ 3mm; each annotated by up to four raters, and a consensus mask is computed as the union of all annotations. Images are cropped to 64×64×64 voxels and resampled to 1×1×1 mm resolution, yielding 901 samples. Finally, for better comparability with the other datasets, we convert the images and masks volumes to 2d by restricting evaluation to the central 50% of the z-axis. 

LIDC-Tex/LIDC-Mal (OoD) The LIDC-IDRI dataset includes nine metadata features, each with 4–6 categorical values assigned by the raters, which we use to define the iD and OoD splits. Specifically, we consider textured (iD) nodules vs. non-textured (OoD) nodules for the texture shift (LIDC-Tex) and benign (iD) nodules vs. malignant (OoD) nodules for the malignancy shift (LIDC-Mal). Since malig-nant nodules are typically larger in size than benign nod-ules, the uncertainty in the LIDC-Mal shift is expected to increase along the object boundaries. In contrast, in the LIDC-Tex shift uncertainty will increase within the nodule, reflecting the change in texture. 

Segmentation We use a 3D U-Net as the segmentation backbone to detect lung nodules, with an initial filter size of 16 and four encoder–decoder blocks. The loss com-bines Dice and cross-entropy terms. Data augmentations include random flipping and Gaussian noise. Training uses the Adam optimizer (learning rate 3e-4 and weight decay 1e-5) with a batch size of 8 and 50% dropout after each con-volutional block. During training, validation performance is 19 Figure D.1. Illustration of dataset diversity as captured by different aggregation measures. Unlike the projection of uncertainty maps into EDS–MOR space (cf. Fig. 2, with non-highlighted datasets shown in gray), projections onto spaces defined by randomly chosen pairs of pixel-intensities or prediction-aware AggSs do not reveal a clear separation of the datasets. Nevertheless, the two-dimensional configuration of CAR-ID and CAR-CS points suggests that a separation might emerge in a multidimensional space incorporating all AggSs. 

measured as the average Dice score between the predictions (or a single prediction for MSP) and each of the four refer-ence annotations. Further details are provided in the Supp. of Kahl et al. [31]. 

D.4. Binary segmentation of microorganisms in mi-croscopy images 

WORM (iD) The C.elegans live/dead assay from Broad Bioimage Benchmark Collection (BBBC010) contains 100 brightfield microscopy images of multiple C. elegans worms with pixelwise foreground and instance segmenta-tion masks [40]. Images are single-channel and and cropped from 696 × 520 pixels to 512 × 512 pixels to match the net-work input constraints. 

WORM-Nem/WORM-Pro (OoD) We use the Protist (1003 samples) and Nematode (468 samples) datasets from the SinfNet Microorganism Image Classifier dataset [65]. Both contain microscope images of various microorgan-isms along with polygon annotations of the instances. For comparability with the iD data, images are converted to grayscale, polygon annotations are converted to pixelwise masks, and both images and masks are cropped/resized to 

512 × 512 pixels. In this binary segmentation setting, the main sources of uncertainty are the unfamiliar shapes of the other microorganisms and the background noise ( e.g . small particles misclassified as foreground). 

Segmentation We train a standard U-Net with 5 convo-lutional layers, ReLU activations and 20% dropout set af-ter each convolutional layer. Input images are augmented with random resized crops, flips, Gaussian blur, sharpness, gamma adjustment, and intensity inversion. The network predicts binary foreground/background, trained with a com-bined Dice and cross-entropy loss. Optimization is per-formed with Adam (learning rate 1e-5, weight decay 1e-5), in batches of 16 for 20 epochs. Validation performance is monitored using the Dice score. 

D.5. Semantic segmentation of urban street scenes 

CAR-ID (iD) The GTA dataset [62] contains 24,966 (1914 × 1052 ) of urban street scenes with dense semantic segmentation masks covering 19 classes from the computer game GTA V. Semantic masks are constructed by intercept-ing information between the game engine and graphics pro-cessor, and by reconstructing and annotating individual ob-jects in scenes. These masks distinguish between 19 seman-tic classes. To address ethical concerns, we verified that the dataset contains only urban street scenes with the 19 seman-tic classes matching standard driving benchmarks; no vio-lent or sexualized content is present, and pedestrians appear incidentally while walking on sidewalks (0.36% of pixels). We thank the anonymous reviewer for bringing this issue to our attention. 

CAR-CS (OoD) The Cityscapes dataset [13] includes 5,000 densely annotated urban street scenes from 27 cities and 20,000 coarsely annotated images from 23 cities. Im-ages were captured via stereo cameras, thus the resolution being 1280 × 720 , and annotations include instance and semantic segmentation masks (differientating 30 classes), which we map to the 19 GTA classes. The OoD-ness stems from a sim-to-real shift, affecting the entire image and re-sulting in more “blurry” uncertainty maps. 20 Segmentation We perform semantic segmentation using HRNet [75] as the backbone, pre-trained on ImageNet. The model is trained with cross-entropy loss and optimized us-ing SGD (learning rate 0.01, weight decay 5e-4, momentum 0.9) with a batch size of 6. Data augmentations include ran-dom horizontal flipping, rotations, scaling, cropping, and Gaussian noise. 50% dropout is applied at the end of each branch. Validation performance is monitored using the Dice score. Further training details are provided in the Supple-ment of Kahl et al. [31]. 

D.6. Crop and Weed 

WEED (iD) The Weedsgalore datase is a high-resolution drone-based multispectral imaging dataset with dense an-notations for crop and weed segmentation in maize fields [8]. We use the training set comprising 104 images, each measuring 600 × 600 pixels, and only the RGB channels for prediction. 

WEED-Hand (OoD) The ”Crop and Weed” dataset [68] contains 8,034 manually captured RGB images covering 16 species of crop and 58 species of weed over a variety of locations, soil types and lightning conditions. For compa-rability with Weedsgalore we collapse annotations into two classes, by considering maize as ”crop” and all other plants as ”weed”. We further crop images to a a quadratic size of 

600 × 600 pixels. 

Segmentation We use publicly available checkpoints of a probabilistic DeepLabv3+ model [12] trained on Weedsga-lore for 3-class semantic segmentation (background, crops, weeds). 

D.7. Training and Hardware 

When training was performed from scratch, it was carried out on single NVIDIA H100 and A40 GPUs using Py-Torch [55]. 

D.8. Evaluation sets 

As evident from the dataset descriptions in this Supp. Sec-tion, dataset sizes vary widely, from roughly 100 training samples in WORM to tens of thousands in CAR. For com-parability between iD and OoD sets, as well as for pro-cessing efficiency, we use randomly selected subsets of the larger datasets for evaluation experiments. Final sample counts are summarized in Table D.1. 

E. Details on Downstream Tasks 

E.1. Out-of-Distribution Detection 

To empirically evaluate the theoretical properties of AggSs, we focus on Out-of-Distribution (OoD) detection at the im-age level rather than the pixel level. Intuitively, humans 

Dataset iD Samples OoD Samples 

ARC-BC 25 50 ARC-Nuc 25 50 LIDC-Mal 53 93 LIDC-Tex 84 20 WORM-Nem 25 47 WORM-Pro 25 82 CAR-CS 300 300 WEED-HAND 26 159 LIZ-SG 193 356 LIZ-IG 193 356 

> Table D.1. Sample counts for iD and OoD splits across evaluation datasets.

perceive an image as OoD as a whole rather than based on individual pixels. Moreover, when part of an image is OoD, it can affect all predictions, making them unreliable. 

Metric: Area Under the Receiver Operating Charac-teristic Curve (AUROC) We use AUROC to assess an AggS’s ability to detect OoD images. Each image is la-beled as 1 for OoD and 0 for iD. The True Positive Rate (TPR) is the proportion of correctly identified OoD images, i.e., the fraction of OoD samples whose aggregated uncer-tainty score exceeds a given threshold. The False Positive Rate (FPR) reflects the proportion of iD images incorrectly classified as OoD, i.e., the fraction of iD samples whose ag-gregated uncertainty score surpasses the same threshold. By varying this threshold, we calculate the TPR and FPR at dif-ferent levels to construct the ROC curve and subsequently compute the AUROC. We use the sklearn library [56] to first compute the TPRs and FPRs of the ROC curve with the ground truth input ( 0 or 1) and the aggregated uncer-tainty scores as target values. From this we then calculate the AUC (area under the curve). 

E.2. Failure Detection 

To assess the impact of AggSs on model performance in real-world applications, we define a continuous failure sig-nal based on two segmentation accuracy metrics: (1) micro-Dice, which captures the accuracy of object and boundary detection in the instance-3-label segmentation task ( e.g . nu-clei and boundary detection), and (2) macro-Dice, which reflects class-wise performance in semantic segmentation tasks. The motivation behind this approach is that, while au-tomated decision-making requires a holistic view at image level, the performance of a panoptic, instance-based three-label, or semantic segmentation model must ultimately be evaluated at the instance level. 21 Metric: Excess-Area Under the Risk-Coverage Curve (E-AURC) As analyzed by Jaeger et al. [30] and origi-nally proposed by Geifman et al. [25], we use the Excess-Area Under the Risk-Coverage Curve (E-AURC) as the evaluation metric for the SC experiment. In this down-stream task, E-AURC measures the quality of AggSs-based ranking while remaining independent of the underlying model’s absolute performance. Moreover, we compute E-AURC for each employed uncertainty-based predictive model, making the segmentation model’s absolute perfor-mance irrelevant and further confirming the suitability of E-AURC for our benchmarking. Like AURC [24], E-AURC balances two objectives: minimizing risk (i.e., ensuring strong classifier performance) while maximizing coverage (i.e., reducing the fraction of cases requiring manual re-view). Both AURC and E-AURC are computed following the implementation of Jaeger et al. [30], adapted here for multi-class segmentation as detailed below. Let ϕ denote a predictive model that maps an image to a multi-class segmentation mask. We define the evalua-tion dataset of images I and segmentation masks M as 

eD = {Iℓ, M ℓ}Lℓ=1 , and the confidence scoring function 

(CSF) g(Iℓ) as the negative aggregated uncertainty score, 

−f (Uℓ). Furthermore, we choose the inverted micro-Dice (macro-Dice) as the risk s associated with a prediction, 

s(I, M, ϕ ) = 1 − Dice( ϕ(I), M ). (3) The risk-coverage curve is obtained by introducing a confi-dence threshold ρ, which leads to the selective risk 

Sel . Risk( ρ|ϕ, g, eD) = 

P 

> ℓ

s(Iℓ, M ℓ, ϕ ) · I(g(Iℓ) ≥ ρ)

P 

> ℓ

I(g(Iℓ) ≥ ρ)

(4) and coverage, defined as the ratio of cases remaining after selection, 

Coverage( ρ|g, eD) = 

P 

> ℓ

I(g(Iℓ) ≥ ρ)

L . (5) The AURC based on a threshold list {ρr }Rr=1 with R values of a CSF that are sorted ascending can then be computed as, 

AURC( f, g, eD) = X

> r

(Coverage( ρr ) − Coverage( ρr−1)·

(6) 

· (Sel . Risk( ρr ) + Sel . Risk( ρr−1)) 2

where we omit the conditioning on ϕ, g, eD on the RHS for brevity. We now derive the E-AURC as follows, 

E-AURC = AURC( ϕ, g, eD) − AURC( ϕ, g ∗, eD) (7) where the second term represents the optimal AURC achievable. This optimal CSF can be defined, for example, by an oracle that assigns to each prediction a confidence equal to the negative risk: g∗(x) = −s(x, y, ϕ ). In prac-tice, this corresponds to perfectly ranking the predictions by their risk, in our case, in ascending order of Dice score. For a formal discussion of the applicability and limitations of this metric, please refer to Jaeger et al. [30]. 

F. Details on UQ map generation 

For UQ, we use Monte Carlo Dropout for all results shown in the main text. All segmentation models employ dropout during training, and the dropout layers remain active at test time. By passing each input image through the model for 

L = 10 times with different dropout masks we gener-ate L samples of the pixel-wise class probabilities p(l) 

> i

(c),where l = 1 , . . . , L indexes the dropout samples and i =1, . . . , mn refers to the pixel index. We then compute the mean class probability across samples as: 

¯pi(c) = 1

L

> L

X

> l=1

p(l) 

> i

(c). (8) Finally, pixelwise uncertainty is calculated using Shannon entropy over the averaged probabilities: 

ui = −

> K

X

> c=1

¯pi(c) log ¯ pi(c). (9) Shannon Entropy is maximal when all K classes have equal probability i.e p(c) = 1 /K for c = 1 . . . K . In that case 

− PKc=1 p(c) log( p(c)) = log( K) and thus the pixelwise uncertainty scores ui fall in [0 , log( K)] where K is the to-tal number of (semantic) classes. The same generation process applies to the pixel-wise class probabilities produced by other UQ methods when replicat-ing the AggSs benchmarking for OoD and FD detection. What differs is how and how many samples p(l) 

> i

(c) are gen-erated: • TTA: L = 16 samples are generated by applying vari-ous combinations of the augmentations used during train-ing to the test input, then inverting them before applying Softmax. • DE: L = 5 samples are obtained from predictions of five segmentation models with identical architecture and training setup, but initialized with different random seeds. • CE: L = 10 samples are generated using nine model checkpoints selected near convergence in the loss basin. we generate L = 10 by using 9 checkpoints of the model registered near convergence to loss basin. To ensure comparability across aggregated uncertainty maps, we divide the pixelwise scores from all UQ methods except MSP by log( K) to make sure all maps are normal-ized such that U ∈ [0 , 1] m×n.22 PCA projection fitted on OOD ID   

> MOR EDS Figure G.1. Effect of PCA. Example of feature collapse resulting from computing a 1D PCA projection in 2D space using only iD samples, and subsequently applying this projection to both iD and OoD samples. The resulting histogram (inset) illustrates that this approach yields poor separability between iD and OoD data.

G. Details on Meta-Aggregation via GMM 

G.1. Gaussian Mixture Models 

The meta-aggregation approach is motivated by the task of OoD detection as illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, we assume ac-cess to a representative collection of uncertainty maps gen-erated from iD data, i.e. data drawn from the same distri-bution the model was trained on. To summarize the overall uncertainty present in these maps, we can apply one of the various aggregation strategies (AggSs) introduced in Sec. 3.1, 3.3 and 3.4. When deploying the same trained model on a new, poten-tially out-of-distribution sample our experimental results in Fig. 3 and Fig. 5 reveal a key challenge: it remains un-clear which specific AggS is most suitable for determining whether a given sample is iD or OoD for any particular task. Therefore, instead of relying exclusively on any single AggS we aim to combine multiple AggSs each focusing on different aspects of the uncertainty map. To this end, we represent each uncertainty map U by its aggregated fea-ture vector fU ∈ Rd, defined as fU = ( f1(U ), . . . , f d(U )) 

where d denotes the number of aggregation strategies. We then model the distribution of these features using a Gaus-sian Mixture Mode Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [16]: 

pGMM 

 fU ; Θ  =

> K

X

> k=1

πk N fU | μk, Σk

. (10) Here, Θ = {πk, μk, Σk}Kk=1 are the parameters of the mix-ture, with πk, μk, and Σk representing the mixing coeffi-cient, mean vector, and covariance matrix of the k-th com-ponent, respectively. The number of components K is se-lected via the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) [66]. Each Gaussian component is defined by 

N fU | μ, Σ = 1(2 π)d/ 2 |Σ|1/2 e− 12 (fU −μ)⊤Σ−1(fU −μ),

And the mixture weights πk are constrained by: 

> K

X

> k=1

πk = 1 , π k ≥ 0. (11) We estimate the mode-parameters Θ on a held-out iD subset and evaluate on unseen iD and OoD data points. The final meta-aggregator score is defined as the negative log-likelihood (NLL): 

fmeta (U ) = − log pGMM 

 fU

, (12) which serves as a unified uncertainty score: larger values indicate greater deviation from the learned iD distribution and thus flag the corresponding sample as likely OoD. An example of the effectiveness of this approach is illus-trated in Fig. 4d-e, where EDS and MOR individually are unable to separate between iD and OoD data. Yet, fitting a GMM on both allows for an improved separation. 

G.2. Data preprocessing 

We compare three different aggregation sets to fit a GMM on: (1) GMM-Int , based on 13 classical intensity-based Ag-gSs; GMM-Spa , which includes our 3 novel spatial AggSs; and (3) GMM-All , which combines all 16 aggregated scores. The relatively high dimensionality of the aggregated uncer-tainty feature vectors would typically motivate dimension-ality reduction prior to fitting the GMM. However, for the task of OoD detection, such an approach can actually be detrimental. As illustrated in Fig. G.1 for the Principled-Component Analysis (PCA) technique: projecting the OoD samples onto the two lower-dimensional PCA subspace leads to a strong overlap between iD and OoD samples, making their separation more challenging. A second preprocessing issue concerns the bounded range of the individual AggSs. These scores lie in [0 , 1] , whereas GMMs are defined over [−∞ , ∞]. However, we find that non-linear transformations can lead to distortions, by exag-gerating differences between data points that are close to 0 or 1, potentially affecting the GMM’s ability to accurately detect OoD samples. Hence, following common practice, we standardize our features fU by f ′ 

> U

= ( fU − μ)/σ , where 

μ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation, respec-tively. This preprocessing is used for the results shown in 23 Figure G.2. Data Normalization. AUROC scores from our OOD detection experiment are shown for four different normalization methods: Beta CDF Gaussianizer, Standard Scaler, Quantile Transformer, and no normalization. The three bar plots represent the performance of the methods GMM-All , GMM-Int , and GMM-Spa under each normalization setting. 

Figure 3 and 5. To evaluate the impact of the normalization methods on the GMM performance, in Fig. G.2 we test four different strategies (including no normalization) for the OoD detec-tion benchmark (note that prior to normalization, we rescale scores as fU = (1 − 2ϵ)( fU − 0.5) + 0 .5 with a small ϵ to avoid values at 0 or 1). Two key takeaways emerge regard-less of the normalization method: (1) the mean AUROC consistently increases when using all the features ( GMM-All ); and (2) the meta-aggregators outperform in most cases (7 out of 10) the individual AggSs (cf. Figure 3). Further-more, while performance varies across individual datasets, the mean AUROC indicates that the Quantile Transformer is the least effective among the tested preprocessing methods. 

G.3. Meta-aggregation ablations 

Figure G.4 provides a comprehensive overview of the abla-tion studies conducted for the meta-aggregation GMM-All 

in OoD detection. We focus on this downstream task, as its evaluation metric is more intuitively interpretable than that of FD. The top panel of Figure G.4a compares the AUROC of GMM-All (shown as a horizontal black line) to leave-one-out variants, in which one AggS is omitted at a time during fitting. Results are visualized as jittered points obtained by evaluating across test samples spanning the 10 benchmark-ing datasets and following the bootstrapping protocol de-scribed in Supp. G.2. The iD and OoD samples used to compute the AUROC are the ones reported in Supp. D.8 and obtained via a fixed split; the remaining iD samples are those used for fitting the GMM. The bottom panel of Fig-ure G.4a, in turn, shows the performance of GMMs fitted on each individual AggS relative to the combined approach. The two panels indicate that fitting GMM-All on all Ag-gSs either outperforms or matches the performance of individual-feature fits in 6 of 10 datasets, with generally minimal sensitivity to the removal of specific features. Ex-ceptions arise when: a particular feature dominates ( e.g ., EDS for CAR-CS and QFR for WEED-Hand, marked as Tukey outliers [72]), or when most features lack clear dis-criminatory power between iD and OoD samples ( e.g ., in LIZ-SG). Notably, the most discriminative AggSs for ARC-BC, ARC-Nuc, CAR-CS, LIDC-MAL, and WEED-Hand are either spatial mass ratios or prediction-based 

(proportion-invariant), consistent with the findings reported in Section 4.5. Figure G.3 provides distributional insights into the individ-ual fitting for the CAR-ID and CAR-CS datasets by illus-trating the distinct iD and OoD distributions of the AggSs. It further depicts the GMM-All density when fitted on each individual AggS (solid line), alongside its corresponding di-agonal component (dotted line) when fitted on all AggSs. While the OoD shift induced by real CAR-CS images rela-tive to synthetic CAR-ID images is clearly reflected in the EDS, this is not the case for MOR, where the support and likelihood of the iD and OoD distributions do not exhibit a clear separation, nor for ATA .3, whose distribution is broader and bi-modal, making an individual GMM fit in-sufficient. In contrast, ENT highlights a key advantage of the meta-aggregator: using a density-based OoD detector allows us to identify OoD samples, even when their ag-gregate uncertainty for that score is lower than that of iD samples. Overall, this illustrates that spatially aware scores can be incorporated as AggSs in a GMM-based OoD detec-tor, potentially allowing us to capture distributional struc-ture beyond simple shifts in aggregate uncertainty. To complement our ablations and provide a mechanistic ex-24 planation for the results in Figure 3, we first fit the GMM-All on all aggregated values using the protocol and sample splits described above. We then compute NLL scores for iD and OoD test samples, followed by SHAP values [41] to as-sess how individual features contribute to the GMM-All pre-dictions (cf. Supp. D.8). These SHAP values quantify the contribution of each AggS to the GMM-All ’s performance in detecting OoD samples. Figure G.4b reports these SHAP values averaged across samples from the 10 benchmarking datasets (absolute SHAP), highlighting that, for datasets where GMM-All 

achieved a particularly high AUROC, all individual AggS components contributed positively, producing a clear sep-aration between OoD samples and the estimated GMM modes. The positive contributions are especially pro-nounced for datasets exhibiting semantic shifts (WEED-Hand, WORM-Nem, WORM-Pro). By contrast, for syn-thetic datasets with covariate shifts (ARC-BC and ARC-Nuc), uncertainty concentrated at cell borders reduces the effectiveness of intensity-based AggSs such as PLM and AQA. These methods rely on hyperparameters tuned to localized uncertainty distributions in the simulated tissue slices, slightly limiting overall GMM-All performance. The performance of GMM-All on CAR-CS is entirely ex-plained by EDS, which alone suffices as a discrimina-tor, followed by ENT. For lung-nodule detection, even if prediction-unaware AggSs are favored by the larger ma-lignant nodules in LIDC-Mal, a few positive outliers from 

prediction-aware and other intensity-based AggSs still con-tribute meaningfully within GMM-All , despite generally offset contributions from the remaining AggSs. A simi-lar pattern occurs for partly solid tumors in LIDC-Tex, al-though the effect of these outliers is milder. Consequently, the GMM-All performance is somewhat lower in LIDC-Tex than in LIDC-Mal, as individual prediction-aware AggSs achieve high performance when fitted with a single GMM (bottom panel of Figure G.4a). Finally, the absolute SHAP values help explain the relatively poor performance of the meta-aggregator on the LIZ dataset. For both OoD variants, LIZ-IG and LIZ-SG, we observe an offset in AggS contri-butions, resulting from the presence of both high and low values for certain features in iD and OoD samples. This variability arises from tissue folds, background noise, and variable cell positioning, independently of the distribution shift introduced by the different recording technique. 

G.4. Gradual distribution shifts 

In this paper, we demonstrated that fitting a Gaussian Mix-ture Model (GMM) on multiple aggregation scores yields a robust OoD detection method. Our experiments were de-signed by pairing an iD dataset with an OoD counterpart, showing that the GMM effectively distinguishes between the two in this binary setting. However, an ideal score   

> Figure G.3. Utilizing spatial measures as AggSs. Histograms of individual AggSs for CAR-ID and CAR-CS are shown along with: 1. a GMM fitted on an an iD subset of the individual score (solid line), and 2. the diagonal component of a GMM fitted on all scores (dotted line). This empirically shows that spatial measures can be leveraged by a GMM to detect OoD samples, even when the shift from iD to OoD is toward lower aggregated values.

should not only support binary classification but also cap-ture gradual distribution shifts. To explore this, we used the synthetic ARC dataset, which enables the study of such progressive changes: ARC-Nuc involves perturbations of nuclei intensity, while ARC-BC involves an increased presence of blood cells (see Fig. G.5). Note, in our main analysis, we only focused on the ARC-Nuc 0.5 and ARC-BC 0.75 variations. Fig. G.5 illustrates whether the aggregated scores increase or decrease in response to the respective perturbations. No-tably, the AVG score shows almost strictly monotonic in-creases. However, its separation between perturbed and un-perturbed samples is less pronounced than that of the GMM score for instance. While the GMM score does not increase perfectly monotonically, it still exhibits a high fraction of increases—0.94 for ARC-Nuc and 0.84 for ARC-BC. Also 

e.g . the AggSs exhibits promising behaviour in that regard. 

H. Details on Limitations 

Uncertainty Types While disentangling epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty is important—particularly for OoD de-25 Figure G.4. GMM Robustness for OoD Detection for all datasets. (a) GMM-All AUROC: leave-one-out (top) and individual fitting (bottom). Using all AggSs generally matches or outperforms individual ones in 6 of 10 cases, with minimal impact from removing specific AggSs. Exceptions occur when a feature dominates ( e.g ., EDS for CAR-CS or ICA in LIDC-MAL, marked in red as Tukey outliers) or when features lack discriminative power between iD and OoD samples ( e.g ., LIZ-SG). The most discriminative AggSs for ARC-BC, ARC-Nuc, CAR-CS, LIDC-MAL, and WEED-Hand are typically spatial mass ratios or prediction-based (proportion-invariant). (b) GMM-All    

> AUROC: absolute SHAP values. Positive values indicate that an AggS helps GMM-All separate iD–OoD, confirming the results observed in (a); bi-directional or null contributions reduce performance (e.g., in LIZ-IG).

tection—such a separation would primarily affect pixel-wise scores rather than the aggregated outputs. Moreover, the impact on failure detection (FD) performance is ex-pected to be limited, as this task may be conducted on iD test data only, depending on the scenario under considera-tion. Nevertheless, investigating how uncertainty type dis-entanglement influences aggregation remains an interesting direction for future work. 

Diversity of datasets and OoD scenarios We aimed for maximal diversity in our datasets, focusing on realistic shifts following Taori et al. [70]. Nevertheless, our selec-tion is naturally non-exhaustive. Other types of OoD shifts, such as image augmentations (e.g., blurring) or new-class shifts in label space, could also be explored. Furthermore, our study focuses on the aggregation of uncertainty in 2D. While we expect many of our findings to generalize to 3D, additional challenges may arise in volumetric settings, such as when uncertainty is concentrated at object surfaces. 

Diversity of AggSs Our work emphasizes the most com-mon intensity-based AggSs. Future investigations could in-corporate additional sources of information beyond predic-tion masks, such as ground truth annotations, error maps for calibration tasks, or auxiliary modalities ( e.g . depth). Another direction is the extension of the pipeline to un-bounded logit-based scores, such as DDU [50, 51] or en-ergy scores [39]. However, this extension is non-trivial, as extreme pixel values can dominate aggregation and may re-quire specifically tailored AggSs. For the AggSs explored 26 Figure G.5. AggSs behavior under gradual perturbations. For varying perturbation levels of a) ARC-Nuc and b) ARC-BC we display the sample-wise behavior of selected AggSs, i.e. an increase with increasing perturbation parameter manipulation is marked as light blue connection, a decrease as red arrow. The overall fraction between de- and increases is inset in the upper left corner of each AggSs plot. 

in this study, hyperparameters were chosen based on stan-dard practices in the literature; a more comprehensive pa-rameter sweep could reveal more optimal settings. 

Gaussian Mixture Models The GMM approach demon-strates the effectiveness of combining individual AggSs for OoD and Failure Detection. In Supp. G.2, we already discuss the potential issue arising from data transforma-tions. Another prominent limitation occurs in low-data, high-dimensional settings, where a GMM may struggle to accurately fit the sample distribution. This highlights the need for more robust OoD detection methods or a reduction in the number of aggregation measures in these particular settings. Alternatives to GMMs could be explored in fu-ture work, such as Vine Copulas [14], which can handle arbitrary distributions within the [0,1] range without requir-ing transformations and may provide greater robustness in a higher dimensional settings. Additionally, further studies could investigate ablations with fewer or better-chosen parameterized AggSs ( e.g .PLM), potentially revealing an optimal dimensionality for the GMM and more stable performance in certain datasets (e.g., LIZ). For completeness, it would be interesting to compare our non-learned, interpretable meta-aggregator with OoD detectors based on learned representations, such as those obtained through self-supervised learning for mod-eling sample distributions. Our approach retains inter-pretability, as it relies on spatial and intensity-based scores whose individual meanings directly reflect the structure and magnitude of uncertainty. 27